Bayesian Invariance Modeling
of Multi-Environment Data

Luhuan Wu†, Mingzhang Yin#, Yixin Wang∗,
John P. Cunningham†, David M. Blei†,‡

5
2
0
2

l
u
J

9

]
L
M

.
t
a
t
s
[

3
v
5
7
6
2
2
.
6
0
5
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Invariant prediction [Peters et al., 2016] analyzes feature/outcome data from
multiple environments to identify invariant features–those with a stable predictive
relationship to the outcome. Such features support generalization to new envi-
ronments and help reveal causal mechanisms. Previous methods have primarily
tackled this problem through hypothesis testing or regularized optimization. Here
we develop Bayesian Invariant Prediction (BIP), a probabilistic model for invariant
prediction. BIP encodes the indices of invariant features as a latent variable and
recover them by posterior inference. Under the assumptions of Peters et al. [2016],
the BIP posterior targets the true invariant features. We prove that the posterior
is consistent and that greater environment heterogeneity leads to faster posterior
contraction. To handle many features, we design an efficient variational approxi-
mation called VI-BIP. In simulations and real data, we find that BIP and VI-BIP
are more accurate and scalable than existing methods for invariant prediction.

Keywords: Bayesian Modeling; Feature Selection; Invariant Prediction; Varia-

tional Inference.

1

Introduction

An important goal of statistics is to identify features that have stable effects across varying
settings and conditions. This ability is important for building robust prediction models
that generalize well to novel situations, and for uncovering causal mechanisms to inform
effective interventions.

To this end, Peters et al. [2016] introduced the problem of invariant prediction. In this
problem, we are given feature/outcome data from multiple environments, each involving
a different data-generating distribution. Our goal is to find the set of features that are
invariant to the environment, i.e., those that govern the outcome in the same way across
all environments. To solve the problem, existing algorithms either search over invariant

†Department of Statistics, Columbia University. ‡Department of Computer Science, Columbia Uni-
versity. #Warrington College of Business, University of Florida. ∗Department of Statistics, University
of Michigan.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
sets and use hypothesis testing [Peters et al., 2016], or frame the problem as a regularized
optimization that encourages an invariant solution [Fan et al., 2023].

In this paper, we introduce Bayesian Invariant Prediction (BIP). We design a prob-
abilistic model of multi-environment data, where the invariant set is encoded as a latent
variable, and we infer the invariant set through Bayesian posterior inference. The BIP
posterior targets the true invariant solution, and it provides a model-based quantification
of uncertainty about the invariant set. We investigate BIP theoretically and empirically.
How does BIP work? At its core, Peters et al. [2016] makes two assumptions about

the data-generating process for invariant prediction:

1. The p features x1, . . . , xp follow different distributions across environments.

2. The outcome y depends on a subset of x in the same way across environments; this

subset is the invariant set.

BIP explicitly bakes these data-generating assumptions into a joint distribution of the
invariant feature set and multi-environment data. We model the outcome, conditional
on the invariant features, to be independent of the environment, and we explicitly model
the per-environment distributions of the features. (We note that Peters et al. [2016] also
assumes a linear data-generating process. Here we do not make linear assumptions.)
Crucially, the invariant feature set is treated as a latent variable.

Originally, Peters et al. [2016] motivated these assumptions through a causal problem.
Each environment arises by an unknown intervention on the features x; the outcome y
is directly caused by a subset of those features; and the goal is to analyze the multi-
environment data to determine the direct causes of y. Here we solve the same problem
but state the invariance assumption directly without appealing to causality. While these
assumptions often arise from a causal problem, invariance has wider applications including
prediction robustness [B¨uhlmann, 2020], domain adaptation [Rojas-Carulla et al., 2018],
and out-of-distribution generalization [Arjovsky et al., 2019].

In detail, BIP models data from E environments, D = {{xei, yei}ne

e=1, where xei
is a vector of p features and yei is an outcome. We encode the latent invariant feature
set through a feature selection vector z ∈ {0, 1}p, where each entry z(i) indicates the
inclusion of the i-th feature. Let xz denote the subvector of features where z(i) = 1 and
x−z the subvector where z(i) = 0. With this notation, the BIP model factorizes as follows

i=1}E

p(z, D) = p(z)

E
(cid:89)

ne(cid:89)

e=1

i=1

pe(xz

ei) g(yei | xz

ei) pe(x−z

ei | yei, xz

ei).

(1)

Notice where the distribution depends on the environment pe and where it is invariant
g. As a generative process, the model says that each environment first produces the
invariant features from a per-environment distribution; then produces the outcome from
an invariant conditional distribution; and finally produces the non-invariant features from
a per-environment distribution, conditional on the invariant features and the outcome.

Given multi-environment data, we can use this model to calculate the posterior dis-
tribution of the invariant set p(z | D). We prove that this posterior distribution is con-

2

sistent under the data generating assumptions of Peters et al. [2016], targeting the true
invariant features. We also analyze the posterior contraction rate with respect to the
per-environment sample size and the number of environments, and characterize its de-
pendence on the prior of z and the heterogeneity of the environments.

Similar to the hypothesis testing method in Peters et al. [2016], exact posterior in-
ference for BIP requires searching over 2p possible sets of invariant features. When p
is large, exact inference is computationally prohibitive. To address this challenge, we
develop VI-BIP a variational inference (VI) algorithm [Jordan et al., 1999, Blei et al.,
2017] to approximate the posterior. VI-BIP finds a p-vector of approximate posterior
probabilities that each feature is in the invariant set. Algorithmically, it optimizes a vari-
ational objective over the discrete feature selector. In this way, it resembles some of the
optimization-based approaches to invariant prediction that optimize continuous regres-
sion parameters with regularization [Arjovsky et al., 2019, Yin et al., 2024]. Compared
to exact inference, VI-BIP does not require an exhaustive exponential search.

We study BIP and VI-BIP on both simulated and real data, comparing performance to
existing approaches [Peters et al., 2016, Rothenh¨ausler et al., 2019, Fan et al., 2023]. The
simulation study verifies our theoretical findings and demonstrates improved accuracy and
scalability of our methods compared to existing works. In particular, VI-BIP performs
competitively with exact inference in low-dimensional settings, while remaining scalable
to high-dimensional cases.
In a real-world study, we examine gene perturbation data
that includes p = 6, 179 features [Kemmeren et al., 2014]. VI-BIP outperforms existing
methods by identifying more true effects based on the inferred invariant features. As a
comparison, existing methods are sensitive to the required feature screening step, which
usually results in either overly conservative predictions or false predictions.

We summarize our contributions as follows:

1. We design Bayesian Invariant Prediction (BIP) for multi-environment data.

It
encodes the invariance assumption and enables posterior inference of the invariant
features.

2. We establish theoretical guarantees for BIP, including posterior consistency and

contraction rates.

3. We develop VI-BIP, a scalable variational inference algorithm for high-dimensional

settings. It overcomes the exponential complexity of exact BIP inference.

4. On simulated and real-world data, we demonstrate that BIP outperforms existing

approaches in terms of inference accuracy and scalability.

The paper is organized as follows. In § 2 we state the invariance assumption and in-
troduce BIP, including the model structure, the exact inference procedure, and a scalable
variational approximation. In § 3, we present theoretical results on posterior consistency
and contraction rates. In § 4, we validate BIP on simulations. In § 5, we use BIP to
study real data. In § 6, we summarize BIP and discuss limitations and future work.

3

1.1 Related works

Invariance closely relates to the independent causal mechanism in causal inference litera-
ture [Peters et al., 2017, Sch¨olkopf et al., 2021], which states that the causal mechanism
p(y|x) and the cause distribution p(x) are independent under the causal structure x → y.
This property implies the possibility of intervening on p(x) while keeping p(y|x) invariant.
Invariance was also studied in econometrics under the terms autonomy and modularity
[Frisch et al., 1948, Hoover, 2008], and later appeared in computer science as stable and
autonomous parent-child relationships in causal graphs [Pearl, 2009, p. 22]. For a histor-
ical overview of invariance, see Peters et al. [2017, Chapter 2.2] and B¨uhlmann [2020].

Peters et al. [2016] is the seminal work that formalized the concept of invariant pre-
diction for machine learning problems, as well as connecting it to causal inference. It
assumes that the distribution of the outcome given a subset of features remains the same
across environments, and under certain conditions, these features are the direct causes of
the outcome. It develops a hypothesis testing approach for identifying such features in
linear models, which requires an exhaustive search over exponentially many candidates.
Since Peters et al. [2016], invariant prediction has become an active area of research.
Heinze-Deml et al. [2018] extends this framework to non-linear settings. Rothenh¨ausler
et al. [2019] proposes an invariance notion based on feature-residual inner products in
linear models, linking it to causal inference under additive interventions. Fan et al. [2023]
incorporates residual-based invariance as a regularization term in linear regression. Wang
et al. [2024] establishes a theoretical connection between invariant prediction models and
causal outcome models, leading to a computationally efficient algorithm for causal dis-
covery. Gu et al. [2025] shows that solving for exact invariance is NP-hard and introduces
an objective that interpolates between exact invariance and predictive performance. In
concurrent research, Madaleno et al. [2025] leverages a Bayesian hierarchical model to
explicitly test the invariance of causal mechanisms.

This paper offers a probabilistic perspective on invariant prediction, with goals closely
aligned to Peters et al. [2016] and Fan et al. [2023]. As we will see below, this perspective
opens the door to both new algorithms and new theoretical understanding.

2 Bayesian Invariant Prediction

2.1 Multi-environment data and the invariance assumption

Consider a dataset of feature-outcome pairs that are organized into multiple environments,
D := {{xei, yei}ne
In each pair, x is a p-dimensional vector and y is a general
outcome. Each environment e indexes a distinct data distribution pe(x, y), and xei, yei
were drawn IID from this distribution.

i=1}E

e=1.

Our main assumption is that some of the features are invariant—the conditional dis-
tribution of the outcome given these features remains unchanged across all environments
[Peters et al., 2016]. We formally state this assumption as follows:

4

Assumption 1 (Invariance). Consider a collection of environments E. Then ∃ z∗ ∈
{0, 1}p such that pe(y | xz∗) is invariant with respect to e ∈ E.

We call z∗ the (true) invariant feature selector and xz∗ the (true) invariant features.

By Assumption 1 and the chain rule, each environment’s joint distribution factorizes,

pe(x, y) = pe(xz∗)p∗(y | xz∗)pe(x−z∗ | xz∗, y).

(2)

The invariant conditional p∗(y | xz∗) ≡ pe(y | xz∗) for all environments e ∈ E.

The problem is that we do not observe the invariant feature selector z∗. Our goal is

to infer z∗ from the observed multi-environment data.

2.2 A Bayesian model of invariant prediction

We propose Bayesian Invariant Prediction (BIP) to infer the true invariant features z∗.
Our model places a prior distribution p(z) over feature selectors z ∈ {0, 1}p and defines
a likelihood based on the invariance assumption.

For now, we assume the local joint distributions {pe(x, y)}E

e=1 are known. Conse-
quently, for any candidate invariant feature selector z, we can calculate the local marginal
pe(xz), local conditionals pe(y|xz), and local feature conditionals pe(x−z | xz, y), all de-
rived from the local joint pe(x, y). In practice, we can estimate these distributions with
a sufficiently large dataset.

To build our likelihood, we also define a pooled conditional distribution of the outcome

given candidate features xz, derived from the collection of local distributions.

Definition 1 (Pooled conditional). Given a feature selector z and a collection of local
distributions {pe(x, y)}e∈E, define the pooled conditional as:

g(y | xz) :=

(cid:80)

e∈E

(cid:82) pe(x, y) dx−z
(cid:80)
e∈E pe(xz)

.

The pooled conditional characterizes the distribution of outcome y given candidate
features xz, based on distributions pooled across environments. In BIP, the pooled con-
ditional will serve as the invariant distribution of the outcome. Its key property is that
it matches the local conditional distributions pe(y | xz) simultaneously across all envi-
ronments if and only if z = z∗. Therefore it will help the posterior center on the true
invariant feature selector. We state this idea formally as follows.

Proposition 1 (Identifiability of invariant features). Under Assumption 1, the equality

g(y | xz) = pe(y | xz),

∀e ∈ E,

holds if and only if z = z∗.

Proof If z = z∗, then by definition of invariance (Assumption 1), pe(y | xz∗) is identical
across environments. Substituting the true factorization from Eq. 2 into the pooled defini-
tion shows equality. Conversely, if g(y | xz) matches each environment’s local conditional

5

distribution pe(y | xz) simultaneously, then these local distributions must themselves be
identical across environments. Thus z must satisfy Assumption 1, making z = z∗.

With the pooled conditional in hand, we now define the BIP model for invariant

feature selection:

• Draw invariant feature selector z ∼ p(z).

• For e = 1, · · · , E ∈ E, and each observation i = 1, . . . , ne:

1. Draw invariant features xz

2. Draw outcome yei | xz
3. Draw remaining features x−z
ei

ei).

ei ∼ pe(xz
ei ∼ g(yei | xz
ei).
ei, yei ∼ pe(x−z
| xz
ei

| xz

ei, yei).

The BIP model encodes invariance. Step 2 explicitly uses the pooled conditional, thereby
enforcing a single conditional distribution for y | xz across environments. The joint
distribution of latent and observed variables was introduced earlier in Eq. 1.

Under Assumption 1, the BIP’s posterior will concentrate around the true invariant
selector z∗. For any candidate z ̸= z∗, the pooled conditional g(y | xz) cannot match all
the true local distributions pe(y | xz), resulting in a lower data likelihood and posterior
probability. But when z = z∗, the pooled conditional matches all local distributions
exactly, leading to maximal likelihood and a posterior centered around the truth.

To see this observation more concretely, we write the posterior distribution explicitly
as a product of prior and likelihood ratios – each between the pooled conditional and a
local conditional. This expression is a key property of our model.

Proposition 2 (Posterior expression). Under the BIP model in Eq. 1, the posterior
distribution simplifies to:

p(z | D) ∝ p(z)

E
(cid:89)

ne(cid:89)

e=1

i=1

g(yei | xz
ei)
pe(yei | xz
ei)

.

(3)

Proof Start from the joint distribution under the model:

p(z, D) = p(z)

E
(cid:89)

ne(cid:89)

e=1

i=1

pe(xz

ei)g(yei | xz

ei)pe(x−z
ei

| xz

ei, yei).

Multiplying a constant of 1 in the form of pe(yei | xz

ei)/pe(yei | xz

ei), we obtain

p(z, D) = p(z)

E
(cid:89)

ne(cid:89)

e=1

i=1

pe(xz

ei)g(yei | xz

ei)pe(x−z
ei

| xz

ei, yei)

pe(yei | xz
pe(yei | xz

ei)
ei)

.

Note that pe(xz

ei)pe(yei | xz

ei)pe(x−z
ei

| xz

ei, yei) = pe(xei, yei). So,

p(z, D) = p(z)

E
(cid:89)

ne(cid:89)

e=1

i=1

pe(xei, yei)

g(yei | xz
ei)
pe(yei | xz
ei)

.

6

The local joint distribution pe(xei, yei) is constant with respect to z. Therefore we obtain
the simplified posterior of Eq. 3.

This expression for the posterior highlights the role of the ratio between the pooled
conditional and the local conditionals, and shows that the posterior centers on the true
invariant feature selector. For choices of z ̸= z∗, the pooled conditional g(y | xz) differs
from the true local distributions pe(y | xz), decreasing the likelihood ratio. However,
at z = z∗, Proposition 1 guarantees equality between the pooled and local conditionals,
maximizing this ratio. Thus the posterior concentrates around the true z∗. We formalize
this intuition through posterior consistency and contraction results in § 3.

Note that the likelihood ratio between pooled and local conditionals precisely tar-
gets the invariance criteria in the frequentist framework of Peters et al. [2016]. In that
framework, a likelihood ratio of one corresponds to the null hypothesis being satisfied,
indicating invariance. Here, the likelihood ratio naturally arises from our distributional
assumptions and a probabilistic modeling perspective.

2.3 Exact posterior inference for BIP

We now turn to the problem of calculating the posterior. In practice, we do not have
access to the true data distributions pe(x, y) and must estimate them. In principle we
could estimate these full joint distributions from data. But note that the simplified
posterior expression in Eq. 3 depends only on the local conditionals pe(y | xz) and pooled
conditional g(y | xz) for each feature selector z. So, we directly model these relevant
conditionals. Specifically, let Py|xz be a conditional model class indexed by z. We estimate
local and pooled conditionals, respectively, via maximum likelihood:

ˆpe(y | xz) := arg max
˜p(y|xz)∈Py|xz

ˆg(y | xz) := arg max
˜p(y|xz)∈Py|xz

ne(cid:88)

i=1
E
(cid:88)

log ˜p(yei | xz

ei),

∀e, z

ne(cid:88)

log ˜p(yei | xz

ei),

∀z.

e=1

i=1

(4)

(5)

We then compute the posterior distribution explicitly by iterating over all candidate

feature selectors z according to Eq. 3:

ˆp(z | D) ∝ p(z)

(cid:89)

ne(cid:89)

e∈E

i=1

ˆg(yei | xz
ei)
ˆpe(yei | xz
ei)

.

(6)

The exact posterior inference procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. The algorithm
explicitly enumerates all candidate feature selectors, estimates the local and pooled con-
ditionals, and calculates the posterior probabilities accordingly.

This procedure can be expensive. When the prior p(z) has full support on {0, 1}p,
the complexity of PI-exact is O(2p · c(D, p)), where c(D, p) is the cost of estimating and
evaluating the conditional models in Eq. 4 and Eq. 5 from data with up to p features.

7

Algorithm 1: BIP: exact posterior inference for invariant features

Input: Dataset D = {(xei, yei)}
Output: Posterior distribution ˆp(z | D)

1 for z in support of p(z) do
2

Estimate local conditionals {ˆpe(y | xz)}E
via Eq. 4 and Eq. 5;
Compute the likelihood ratio: ˆΛ(z) ← (cid:81)E
4 Compute the posterior: ˆp(z | D) ∝ p(z)ˆΛ(z).

3

e=1 and pooled conditional ˆg(y | xz)

(cid:81)ne
i=1

ˆg(yei|xz
ei)
ei) .
ˆpe(yei|xz

e=1

Algorithm 2: VI-BIP: variational inference for invariant features

Input: Dataset D, iterations T , number of gradient samples M , learning rate

scheduler r(·)

Output: Variational posterior qϕT (z)

1 Initialize variational parameter ϕ0
2 for t = 1 to T do
3

Compute M unbiased gradient estimates of the ELBO using U2G
(Algorithm 3, see the supplementary materials): ˆhm ≈ ∇ϕL(D, ϕt−1) for
m = 1, . . . , M
Update variational parameters: ϕt ← ϕt−1 + r(t) · 1
M

(cid:80)M

ˆhm

m=1

4

With prior information restricting the support of p(z) to subsets of size at most pmax,
the complexity reduces to O(ppmax · c(D, pmax)). However, this complexity may still be
prohibitive for large p. In the next section, we introduce a scalable variational inference
method suitable for high-dimensional settings.

2.4 Variational inference for BIP

Exact posterior inference (§ 2.3) enumerates all possible invariant selectors, which is
infeasible for large feature sets. Here we turn to variational inference [VI, Blei et al.,
2017] to develop VI-BIP, an approximate inference algorithm to estimate the posterior.
VI approximates the posterior with a simpler distribution. We posit a mean-field

family of approximate posterior distributions of z:

qϕ(z) :=

p
(cid:89)

j=1

Bernoulli (cid:0)z(j) | sigmoid(ϕ(j))(cid:1) ,

where sigmoid(·) := exp(·)
parameters by maximizing the evidence lower bound (ELBO),

1+exp(·) , and ϕ ∈ Rp are the variational parameters. We then fit these

L(D, ϕ) = Eqϕ(z) [log p(z, D) − log qϕ(z)]

(cid:34)

= Eqϕ(z)

log p(z) +

E
(cid:88)

ne(cid:88)

e=1

i=1

log

g(yei | xz
ei)
pe(yei | xz
ei)

(cid:35)

− log qϕ(z)

+ C,

(7)

where C = (cid:80)E

e=1

(cid:80)ne

i=1 log p(xei, yei) is a constant with respect to ϕ. The optimal varia-

8

tional parameters minimize the KL divergence to the exact posterior.

In detail, we first estimate ˆg(y | xz) and ˆpe(y | xz) from data, and then optimize
Eq. 7 with stochastic optimization. Specifically, we use Monte Carlo approximations of
gradients of the ELBO, a form of black box variational inference [Kingma and Welling,
2014, Ranganath et al., 2014]. Algorithm 2 summarizes this procedure. The complexity
of VI-BIP is O(T · M · c(D, p)) for T iterations and M gradient samples. When the cost
of exact BIP inference is prohibitive, VI-BIP provides a good alternative.

A technical challenge in VI-BIP is computing gradients of the ELBO, which involve
expectations with respect to the discrete variational distribution qϕ(z). Standard repa-
rameterization gradients do not directly apply, as they require continuous latent variables.
Here we use the unbiased U2G gradient estimator [Yin et al., 2020]; see Algorithm 3 in the
supplementary materials. For a comprehensive discussion of gradient estimation methods
for discrete latent variables, see Mohamed et al. [2020]. Additional implementation and
optimization details for VI-BIP are provided in Supplementary Section B.2.

3 Theory

We analyze asymptotic behavior of the posterior distribution ˆp(z | D) obtained via exact
inference (under estimated models ˆpe) as described in Algorithm 1. For simplicity (and
without loss) we assume the sample size is the same across environments, i.e. ne = n.
To enable asymptotic analysis of infinite environments, we assume each environment is
drawn from a uniform distribution p(e) over the set of all environments of interest E.

We outline our theoretical findings as follows:

• § 3.1: Under suitable assumptions the posterior ˆp(z | D) concentrates on the true
z∗ as both environment size E and per-environment sample size n grow to infinity.
With additional regularity conditions, it contracts exponentially in n and E, with
faster rates under stronger prior knowledge and greater environment heterogeneity.

• § 3.2: We extend the main results to settings with finite n or E. Additionally, we
show that when assumptions are relaxed, the posterior concentrates on the most
“approximately invariant” feature selectors under the given model and prior.

We use P→ to denote convergence in probability, supp (p(z)) for the support of p(z),
and ∀pz to mean for every z with positive prior value. Additional results and proofs are
included in Supplementary Section A.

3.1 Main results

We make the following assumptions:

Assumption 2 (Uniqueness). In Assumption 1, the existence of z∗ is unique.

Assumption 3 (Prior positivity). In Assumption 1, z∗ has positive prior mass.

9

Assumption 4 (Estimation consistency). ∀pz, as n → ∞ and E → ∞,

n
(cid:88)

E
(cid:88)

log ˆpe(yei | xz

ei) P→ Ep(e)pe(y,xz) [log pe(y | xz)] ,

1
nE

and

1
nE

i=1
n
(cid:88)

e=1
E
(cid:88)

i=1

e=1

log ˆg(yei | xz

ei) P→ Ep(e)pe(y,xz) [log g(y | xz)] .

With these assumptions, we now state our first theorem. Given infinite data and

environments, BIP correctly identifies the invariant z∗.

Theorem 1 (Posterior consistency). Suppose Assumptions 1 to 4 hold, and take the
limits n → ∞ and E → ∞. The BIP posterior satisfies the following properties:

• consistency of the posterior mode: ˆzn,E := arg maxz ˆp(z | D) P→ z∗
• consistency of the posterior at z∗: ˆp(z∗ | D) P→ 1.

The proof is provided in Supplementary Section A.2. Theorem 1 relies on key as-
sumptions: Assumption 1 asserts that the true data generating process satisfies invari-
ance; Assumption 2 guarantees identifiability of z∗; Assumption 3 requires the prior is
well-specified; Assumption 4 ensures consistent estimation of the likelihood.

Next, we characterize the posterior contraction rate. First we make an assumption.

Assumption 5 (Finite variance of log-likelihood ratio). ∀pz, the log-likelihood ratio
log pe(y | xz) − log g(y | xz) has finite variance, that is,

v(z) := Varp(e)pe(y,xz) ([log pe(y | xz) − log g(y | xz)]) < ∞.

This regularity condition enables control over posterior contraction through Cheby-
shev’s inequality. To state the contraction rate, we define the total variational distance
TV(·, ·) between the posterior and the Dirac measure centered at the true z∗ as follows,

(cid:16)

TV

ˆp(z | D), δz∗(z)

(cid:17)

=

1
2

(cid:32)

(cid:88)

z̸=z∗

|ˆp(z | D) − 0| + |p(z∗|D) − 1|

= 1 − ˆp(z∗|D).

(cid:33)

Theorem 2 (Posterior contraction rate). Given Assumptions 1 to 5, there exists a se-
quence ϵn,E = O(R · e−κnEµmin) such that

(cid:32)

P

(cid:16)

TV

ˆp(z | D), δz∗(z)

(cid:17)

(cid:33)

> ϵn,E

→ 0

as n → ∞ and E → ∞, where κ is a fixed value in (0, 1), and

(cid:18)

R :=

max
z̸=z∗

(cid:19)

p(z)
p(z∗)

· |supp (p(z)) |,

µ(z) := Ep(e)pe(xz) [KL [pe(y | xz) ∥ g(y | xz))]] ,
µmin := min

¯µ(z).

z̸=z∗,p(z)>0

10

(8)

(9)

(10)

The proof is provided in Supplementary Section A.3. Theorem 2 shows that the BIP
posterior contracts around z∗ exponentially fast, with respect to n and E. It also reveals
two key factors that influences the contraction rate.

The first is the prior, which influences the term R in Eq. 8. An informative prior that
p(z)
p(z∗) (or
assigns lower probability to non-invariant zs will lead to smaller value of maxz̸=z∗
|supp (p(z)) |), and hence a smaller R and faster contraction. In contrast, a prior fully
supported on {0, 1}p results in an exponential dependence of R on the dimensionality
p, since |supp (p(z)) | = 2p. This analysis highlights the challenge of high-dimensional
invariant prediction problems and the importance of an informative prior in that setting.
The second factor is the heterogeneity of environments, captured by µmin in Eq. 10.
µmin is defined as minimum of µ(z) (Eq. 9) among non-invariant zs, where each µ(z)
measures the discrepancy between local and pooled conditionals given z. By Assump-
tion 1, µ(z∗) = 0 and µ(z) > 0 for z ̸= z∗. When environments are more similar, local
conditionals pe(y | xz) tend to align and hence closer to the pooled conditional g(y | xz),
yielding smaller µ(z). As a result, µmin is smaller, and the posterior contracts more
slowly. Conversely, a larger µmin suggests greater environment heterogeneity, leading to
faster posterior contraction. We empirically confirm this relationship in § 4.1, where we
manually increase the environment heterogeneity level and observe faster contraction.

3.2 Finite-sample extensions and violations of the assumptions

We presented our main theoretical results with infinite samples per environments and
infinite environments. Here, we consider several extensions, including finite-sample situ-
ations and cases where assumptions are violated. The detailed theorems and proofs are
in Appendices A.4 and A.5. Here we summarize the main findings.

First, consider finite samples. Suppose we observe a fixed set of environments and let
per-environment sample size n → ∞. The consistency results and rates from Section 3.1
continue to hold, provided that z∗ remains identifiable within the observed environments.
This condition requires sufficient heterogeneity among the environments.

Alternatively, when each environment has finite samples but the number of environ-
ments grows large (E → ∞), the local models ˆpe(y | xz) become biased. We must control
these biases for the consistency results to extend.

Now we consider violations of the main assumptions.

• Violation of invariance (Assumption 1). Recall the discrepancy measure µ(z) in Eq. 9.
If invariance holds exactly, µ(z) reaches its minimum at z∗, with zero discrepancy
µ(z∗) = 0. When invariance is violated, the posterior concentrates on the feature se-
lector minimizing µ(z), which is considered the most approximately invariant solution.

• Violation of uniqueness (Assumption 2). When multiple invariant feature selectors
exist, the posterior distributes its mass among all invariant solutions. This issue is am-
plified with limited environments, while introducing additional environments reduces
the number of posterior modes. § 4.2 provides an empirical illustration.

11

• Violation of positive prior support (Assumption 3). Suppose the prior assigns zero
probability to the true invariant feature selector z∗. Then the posterior again concen-
trates on the most approximately invariant feature selector within the prior support.

• Model misspecification (Assumption 4). Suppose the estimation consistency assump-
tion fails. Then the posterior concentrates on the minimizer of an alternative discrep-
ancy measured (as opposed to µ(z) in Eq. 9), which captures the expected difference
between the best-fitting local and pooled models within the assumed model class.

In sum, when assumptions hold exactly, the posterior is consistent for the true in-
variant features. When assumptions fail, it remains consistent, but toward the most
approximately invariant features that are feasible within the model class and prior.

4 Synthetic study

We evaluate the BIP framework with simulated data under known distributions. With
these simulations, we confirm our theory, explore the properties of uncertainty quantifica-
tion, and empirically compare our approach to existing methods for invariant prediction.
In what follows, BIP as a standalone method refers to the version with exact inference,
and VI-BIP denotes its variational approximation. All experimental details are provided
in Supplementary Section C. We summarize our findings as follows:

• In § 4.1 we empirically verify the theory in § 3.1 with p = 3 features where exact
inference for BIP is tractable. Our results confirm posterior consistency and contraction
rates as the number of environments E and per-environment sample size n increase.

• In § 4.2 we demonstrate how the BIP posterior quantifies uncertainty when there are
multiple invariant sets, limited environments, and p = 2 features. We show how a multi-
modal posterior empirically favors sparser feature selectors. As more environments
are observed, the number of posterior modes decreases and the posterior uncertainty
shrinks. This study supports the theory in § 3.2.

• In § 4.3 we compare BIP and VI-BIP to existing methods for invariant prediction.
We study both a low-dimensional setting (p = 10) and a high-dimensional setting
(p = 450). We show that BIP and VI-BIP recover the invariant feature selector in
low dimensions; and for high-dimensions, VI-BIP is more scalable and accurate than
existing methods, while BIP with exact inference becomes computationally infeasible.

Data generation. To simulate multi-environment data, we specify a series of joint
distributions that factorize consistently across environments:

pe(x, y) =

p+1
(cid:89)

i=1

pe(t(i) | t(1:i−1)),

∀e,

(11)

12

where the vector t ∈ Rp+1 is a permuted version of the concatenated vector (x(1:p), y).
The permutation is drawn once and fixed across all environments.

Each conditional distribution in Eq. 11 is a linear Gaussian. For i > 1,

pe(t(i) | t(1:i−1)) = N (t(i) | α⊤

eit(1:i−1) + βei, σ2

ei),

with parameters αei ∈ Ri−1, βei, σei ∈ R. For i = 1 we set pe(t(1) | t(1:0)) = N (t(1) |
e1) with parameters βe1, σe1 ∈ R. (For convenience, t(1:0) denotes an empty vector.)
βe1, σ2
We generate the parameters of these conditionals for the different environments as
follows. For the observational environment (e = 1), we independently draw the parameter
values {α1i, β1i, σ1i} for each of the p features and the outcome, where i = 1, · · · , p+1. For
the subsequent interventional environments (e > 1), we intervene on a subset of features
based on the observational environment. Specifically, we draw an intervention set of
features xI ⊂ x and modify their conditional distributions. For non-intervened features
t(i) ̸∈ xI, we retain the same conditional as in the observational environment, pe(t(i) |
t(1:i−1)) = p1(t(i) | t(1:i−1)). For intervened features t(i) ∈ xI, we independently draw new
values {αei, βei, σei} for each environment e > 2. Per the assumptions, the conditional
distribution for the outcome y is invariant across all environments. This setup ensures
distinct joint distributions pe(x, y) across environments, while the conditional outcome
distribution p(y | xz∗) remains invariant. To control the diversity of the environments,
we also modulate the intervention strength, the fraction of intervened features |xI|/p.

Prior specification and model estimation With low-dimensional data (p = 2, 3, 10)
we use a uniform prior of z over {0, 1}p. With high-dimensional data (p = 450) we
use a sparse prior.
In all settings, we model local and pooled conditionals as linear
Gaussians and estimate parameters via maximum likelihood estimation (Eq. 4 and Eq. 5,
respectively). We use linear Gaussian models for competing methods as well.

4.1 Empirical verification of theory

We study the empirical behavior of the posterior in simulations with p = 3 features. We
vary per-environment sample size n from 10 to 200, the number of environments E from
1 to 5, and intervention strength from 0.33 to 1 (intervening on 1 to 3 features).

Figure 1 (A) shows the posterior value at the true z∗, ˆp(z∗|D). For each level of
intervention strength, ˆp(z∗|D) converges to 1 with increasing n or E, corroborating the
theory on posterior consistency in § 3.1. The empirical rate at which ˆp(z∗|D) converges
to 1 is faster under higher intervention strength.

Figure 1 (B) plots the heterogeneity metric µmin that governs the posterior contrac-
tion rate ϵn,E = O(R · e−κnEµmin) against the number of environments E under different
intervention strength. We observe that µmin increases with both E and intervention
strength. In both cases, the observed environments become more heterogeneous, leading
to faster posterior contraction. The trend in Figure 1 (B) aligns with the empirical trend
in Figure 1 (A), confirming the expected posterior contraction behavior.

13

Figure 1: Synthetic study: empirical verification of posterior consistency (left) and con-
traction rate (right) with p = 3 features. (A): The posterior value at the invariant z∗,
ˆp(z∗ | D), increases with the per-environment sample size n, number of environments
E, and intervention strength “Int. strength”. Results are averaged over 1,000 simula-
tions with 95% confidence bands. (B): The heterogeneity measure µmin (Eq. 10), which
controls the posterior contraction rate ϵn,E = O(R · e−κnEµmin), increases with both the
number of environments E as well as intervention strength.

Figure 2: Synthetic study: uncertainty quantification with p = 2 features. Given E = 2
environments (left), the posterior ˆp(z | D) is multi-modal, centered at two invariant
solutions z = [1, 0], [1, 1]. When a new environment is introduced (E = 3, right), z = [1, 0]
becomes the only invariant feature selector. The updated posterior is only concentrated
at [1, 0]. All results are averaged over 1,000 simulations with 95% confidence bands.

4.2 Uncertainty quantification in limited environments

We present a synthetic example in which multiple invariant feature selectors exist under
a limited number of environments, supporting the discussion in § 3.2.

We construct 3 environments with p = 2 features, x = [x(1), x(2)], with following
properties: (A) pe(y | x(1)) and pe(y | x(1:2)) are invariant across e = 1, 2; (B) After intro-
ducing the third environment, only pe(y | x(1)) remains invariant. For each environment,
we draw n = 200 samples. Supplementary Section C.2 gives the details of this data.

Figure 2 plots the posterior distribution for all four possible z values. With only two
environments (left panel), the posterior is multimodal, placing substantial mass on z =
[1, 0] and z = [1, 1]. After introducing the third environment (right panel), the posterior
concentrates only at z = [1, 0] and the uncertainty shrinks accordingly. This result
supports the discussion in § 3.2: sufficiently heterogeneous environments are necessary
for posterior consistency, whereas with limited environments, the posterior concentrates
on all valid invariant selectors.

14

123450.00.51.0̂p(z*|D)(A)Int. strength = 0.3312345Int. strength = 0.6612345Int. strength = 1.00sample size n1025501002001234501234μmin(B)Int. strength0.330.661.0# of environments E# of environments E[0,0][1,0][0,1][1,1]0.00.51.0̂p(z|D)# of environments E = 2[0,0][1,0][0,1][1,1]# of environments E = 3feature selector zFinally, we note that with two environments (Figure 2, left panel), the posterior
density at z = [1, 0] is higher than that at z = [1, 1], despite both yielding invariant
predictions. This difference arises from model estimation bias: estimating conditional
models given two features (z = [1, 1]) typically results in a larger estimation bias, com-
pared to models given one feature (z = [1, 0]), and especially so for small sample sizes.
When true models are available, this estimation artifact disappears—with large sample
sizes (and a uniform prior), the posterior assigns equal mass to both solutions.

4.3 Comparison to other methods

We now compare BIP and VI-BIP to existing methods for invariant estimation. Here
we present the main results. Supplementary Section C.3 contains additional details and
results.

Empirical setup. We perform separate simulations with feature sizes p = 10 and
p = 450. We vary the per-environment sample size n from {50, 200, 500}, and vary the
number of environments E from 1 to 20 for p = 10, and from 1 to 40 for p = 450. For each
combination of (p, n, E), we generate 400 datasets under different intervention strengths.

With this catalog of simulations, we compare the following methods:

1. Oracle: We fit a pooled linear regression on the true invariant features xz∗ and return

the ones significant at the α = 0.05 level.

2. Regression: Similar to Oracle, but linear regression is performed on all features rather
than restricting to the true invariant features. If p + 1 > nE, we use Lasso [Tibshirani,
1996] with 10-fold cross-validation.

3. Invariant causal prediction (ICP) [Peters et al., 2016] : With ICP, we use the signifi-

cance level α = 0.05 for its multiple hypothesis testing procedure.

4. Hidden-ICP [Rothenh¨ausler et al., 2019] An extension of ICP enabling faster inference
for an alternative notion of invariance. We run it at the significance level α = 0.05.

5. EILLS [Fan et al., 2023] : A linear regression model that introduces a regularization
term to encourage invariant predictions among environments. Following the default
choice in their codebase, the invariance regularization strength γ is set to 36.

6. Bayesian invariant prediction (BIP) [this paper] : Our method with exact inference
(Algorithm 1). We use the posterior mode as the BIP estimate of the invariant selector.

7. Variational inference BIP (VI-BIP) [this paper] : Our method with variational infer-
ence (Algorithm 2). Again, we use the posterior mode as the VI-BIP estimate of the
invariant selector.

Note that BIP, ICP and EILLS require enumerating all candidate invariant sets, which
is only feasible for small p. And for Hidden-ICP, parameter estimation is intractable when
p exceeds the number of observations. To address these issues in the high dimensions

15

Figure 3: Synthetic study: comparison to other methods with p = 10 features. Results
are averaged over cases with n = 50, 200, 500, each with 400 random simulations under
varying intervention strength. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. (A): Exact
discovery rate improves with E for all methods, with Oracle converging fastest, followed
by BIP and VI-BIP. Oracle and ICP maintain coverage near 1 across all E, while coverage
for BIP, VI-BIP, and ELLIS gradually increases to 1. Other methods show relatively
low coverage. (B): BIP’s posterior value at z∗ increases with both E and intervention
strength, as each case leads to higher heterogeneity across environments.

(p = 450), we first apply a screening step, selecting the 10 features with the largest
absolute regression coefficients. We then apply the methods that cannot handle the full
dimension to only the screened features. In the results, we label these screened versions
of the algorithms as BIP-s, ICP-s, Hidden-ICP-s, and EILLS-s.

We emphasize that VI-BIP does not require enumeration of candidate sets, and so
more easily applies to high-dimensional settings. However, we found that the uniform
prior over the full space of {0, 1}p leads to unstable optimization when p is large. In the
high dimensional case (p = 450), we set the prior to be uniform over {z ∈ {0, 1}p : ∥z∥0 ≤
20}, i.e., a uniform prior over sets of up to 20 features. Note we still optimize over all
sets of 20 features. This informative prior is significantly different from a screening step.

Evaluation metrics. Each method produces an estimate of the invariant selector ˆz∗.
Given the ground truth z∗, we use two metrics: (i) exact discovery rate, which measures
the average occurrence where the estimated invariant features exactly recover the true
invariant features, and (ii) coverage, which measures the average occurrence where the
estimated invariant features is a subset of the true invariant features. A perfect method
should achieve 1 on both metrics. We emphasize that coverage alone can be misleading,
as always predicting the empty set yields full coverage but zero exact discovery.

Low-dimensional results. Figure 3 displays the results for p = 10. Panel (A) plots the
exact discovery rate (left) and coverage (right) versus the number of environments E. As
E increases, all methods improve in exact discovery rate. At E = 20, all except Regression
and Hidden-ICP reach an exact discovery rate close to 1, demonstrating effectiveness with
sufficient environments. Oracle converges fastest, followed by BIP and VI-BIP.

For coverage, we observe an upward trend for all methods as E increases. Both the
oracle and ICP consistently maintain a coverage close to 1 across different values of E.
Notably, when E is small, ICP returns empty prediction for most simulations, leading to
a high coverage but low exact discovery rate. The coverage of our methods, both BIP

16

051015200.00.51.0Exact discovery(A)051015200.00.51.0CoverageMethodOracleRegressionEILLSHidden-ICPICPBIPVI-BIP051015200.00.51.0̂p(z*|D)(B)Int. strength0.20.40.60.81.0# of environments E# of environments EFigure 4: Synthetic study: comparison to other methods with p = 450 features. Results
are averaged over cases with n = 50, 200, 500, each with 400 random simulations under
varying intervention strength. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. Methods
with the “-s” suffix use a pre-screening step. (A): The exact discovery rate of Ora-
cle and VI-BIP converges to 1 as E increases, while it remains low for other methods.
Oracle maintains near-perfect coverage across all E, and coverage of VI-BIP gradually
approaches to 1. EILLS-s achieves high coverage at large E but this is due to frequent
empty predictions. Other methods have low coverage. (B): The variational posterior
value at the true z∗ by VI-BIP increases with both E and intervention strength, but
remains below 0.2 even at the largest E = 40 considered.

and VI-BIP, converges to near perfect coverage when E = 20.

Figure 3 (B) displays the posterior value at the true z∗ given by BIP. The posterior
value converges to 1 as the number of environments increases. Additionally, the con-
vergence is faster with higher intervention strength. This result is consistent with the
theoretical contraction rates. We include the variational posterior value at z∗ from VI-
BIP in Figure S3 in the supplementary material, where we observe a similar trend as in
the exact inference, but with a slower convergence rate compared to the exact posterior.

High-dimensional results. Figure 4 gives the results for p = 450. Panel A (Left)
shows that the exact discovery rate of Oracle and VI-BIP converges to 1 as the number
of environments E increases.
In contrast, the remaining methods exhibit a near-zero
exact discovery rate across E, primarily due to failures in the pre-screening step.

In Figure 4, Panel A (Right) displays the coverage results. As expected, Oracle main-
tains near-perfect coverage. The coverage of VI-BIP approaches 1 as more environments
are observed. Notably, EILLS-s achieves high coverage at large E by predicting an empty
invariant feature set in these scenarios. The remaining methods have low coverage.

Figure 4 (B) plots the variational posterior density q(z∗) at the true z∗ by VI-BIP.
q(z∗) increases with larger E or higher intervention strength. However, q(z∗) is not close
to 1 even at the largest E = 40 tested, reflecting a sufficient amount of uncertainty.
This uncertainty amplifies the marginal uncertainty in the mean-field variational distri-
bution. For example, if each marginal q(z∗(i)) = .996, ∀i, then the joint posterior value is
exponentially smaller q(z∗) = .996450 = .165, leading to substantial overall uncertainty.

17

0102030400.00.51.0Exact discovery(A)0102030400.00.51.0CoverageMethodOracleRegressionEILLS-sHidden-ICP-sICP-sBIP-sVI-BIP0102030400.00.10.2q(z*)(B)Int. strength0.20.40.60.81.0# of environments E# of environments E5 Gene perturbation study

We revisit a real-world application studied in Peters et al. [2016], Meinshausen et al.
[2016], Rothenh¨ausler et al. [2019] which involves predicting genes whose deletion signif-
icantly alters the expression of some target gene. All experimental details are provided
in Supplementary Section D. Our findings are summarized below.

• VI-BIP achieves high precision and moderate recall, outperforming existing invariant

prediction approaches that depend on feature pre-screening in high dimensions.

• VI-BIP’s predictions closely align with the top 10 stable findings reported in Mein-

shausen et al. [2016].

Dataset and setup. The dataset comes from a large-scale gene perturbation experi-
ment in yeast, where genome-wide mRNA expression levels are measured for 6,170 genes
[Kemmeren et al., 2014]. It includes two environments: 262 observational samples for
e = 1 where no gene deletion is performed, and 1,479 interventional samples for e = 2
where each sample is obtained by a unique gene deletion. Our goal is to predict whether
an unseen gene deletion will significantly change the expression level of some target gene.
Following Peters et al. [2016], this problem can be approached by invariant prediction.
We treat the expression level of the target gene as outcome y and the expression levels
of the remaining p = 6, 169 genes as features x. The goal becomes to find a subset of
feature genes xz∗ ⊂ x that invariantly predict y across environments.
If an invariant
feature x′ ∈ xz∗ is deleted, then the outcome y is expected to change in the resulting
new environment, which allows us to predict the gene deletion effect. For non-invariant
̸∈ xz∗, we do not make such prediction. Peters et al. [2016] also provides a
feature x′
justification through a causal perspective, where the invariant feature genes are viewed
as the direct causes of the target gene.

We set up the training and validation procedure largely following Peters et al. [2016].
The interventional samples from e = 2 are randomly divided into 5 blocks at the be-
ginning. We then sweep through 6,170 genes, treating each as the target gene, with the
remaining genes as features. For each target gene, we construct a training set that in-
cludes all observational samples from e = 1 and 4 out of 5 blocks of interventional samples
from e = 2, reserving the remaining block for validation. Note if the training set contains
a sample corresponding to the perturbation of the target gene, we exclude it as we want
to make sure the distribution of the target gene is not affected. This process is repeated
five times, with each block of interventional samples held out once, ensuring that each
gene perturbation result is used for validation at least once. To evaluate predictions of
invariant features, we check the validation set to determine whether perturbing these
features leads to a significant change in the expression level of the target gene.
We run the following methods to infer the invariant feature selector z∗:

1. Marginal : we pool training data over the two environments and retain all features
that have a correlation with the outcome y at significance level α/p with α = 0.01.

18

2. Lasso: we run Lasso on the pooled training data where the regularization penalty is
selected from {0.1, 0.05, 0.01, 0.005, 0.001} with 5-fold cross-validation and retain up
to 10 features with the highest non-zero absolute coefficient values.

3. EILLS-s [Fan et al., 2023] : we run EILLS on the screened features with an invariance

regularization strength γ. We vary γ ∈ {1, 25, 50, 75, 100};

4. Hidden-ICP-s [Rothenh¨ausler et al., 2019] : We run hidden-ICP on the screened co-

varaites at significance level α. We vary α ∈ {0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1};

5. ICP-s [Peters et al., 2016] : we run ICP on the screened features at significance level
α/nint. We vary α ∈ {0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1}, and the factor nint = 1, 479 is used
for Bonferroni correction, as suggested by Peters et al. [2016].

6. BIP-s [this paper] : we calculate the exact BIP posterior using the screened features
with a uniform prior, retaining features whose marginal posterior probability is above
a threshold t. We vary t ∈ {0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9}.

7. VI-BIP [this paper] : we run VI-BIP using the full set of features with a sparse prior
uniform over {z ∈ {0, 1}p : ∥z∥0 ≤ 200}, retaining the features whose marginal pos-
terior probability is above a threshold t. We vary t ∈ {0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9}. See the
optimization details in Supplementary Section D.

As in the synthetic study, EILLS-s, ICP-s, BIP-s and Hidden-ICP-s all use a pre-screening
step due to high dimensionality. The screened features are initially selected using the
features returned by Lasso. If Lasso does not return any features (all coefficients are 0)
we instead select up to the top 10 features with largest absolute correlation values from
Marginal. For all methods, the conditional outcome distribution is a linear Gaussian.

Evaluation metrics. To compare the methods, we measure precision and recall. We
evaluate the effect of a predicted invariant feature gene on the target gene using a held-out
validation set. If deleting the feature gene leads to a significant change in the expression
level of the target, the prediction is considered correct.

Due to the limited validation data, not all predictions can be empirically validated.
Therefore, we compute precision as the ratio of correct predictions to the total number of
predictions that can be validated. Similarly, recall is the ratio of the correct predictions
to the total number of significant gene deletion effects that can be validated.

Results. Figure 5 presents the results, excluding Marginal as it is an outlier. Different
methods demonstrate different trade-offs between precision and recall. We summarize
as follows: (i) VI-BIP is the most accurate method (with highest precision) and has a
moderate recall; (ii) ICP-s is the second most accurate but also the most conservative as
indicated by the lowest recall; (iii) Other invariant prediction methods and Lasso have
lower precision and higher recall compared to VI-BIP; (iv) Marginal, which is not plotted
in the figure, has the lowest precision of 0.11, but the highest recall of 0.87. These patterns
remain consistent across the range of hyperparameter settings used for each method.

19

Figure 5: Gene perturbation study: precision v.s. recall. Each dot shows the average
result over 3 random seeds, with error bars indicating 2 standard errors. Colors denote
methods, and multiple dots per method reflect different hyperparameter settings with
larger dots indicating more conservative settings (see Supplementary Section D). VI-
BIP consistently achieves a favorable precision-recall trade-off with the highest precision
among all methods and recall higher than ICP-s across different hyperparameter settings.

We discuss potential reasons why Marginal exhibits significantly higher recall values
than the other methods. For methods that rely on screening, lower recall is expected
as their predictions are constrained within a maximum of 10 screened features. VI-BIP,
while it does not use screening, imposes a sparse prior with a maximum invariant feature
size of 200, which also restricts recall. Moreover, the true posterior, based on only two
environments, may be multi-modal. In such cases, the mean-field variational distribution
used by VI-BIP may struggle to capture the full posterior landscape, leading to partial
coverage and thereby reduced recall. Other contributing factors include violations of the
invariance assumption and misspecification of the conditional outcome model.

Comparison between VI-BIP and ICP-s. Finally, we provide a detailed comparison
between VI-BIP and ICP-s, as they achieve higher precision than other methods. We
examine the predictions made by VI-BIP with a marginal probability threshold of t = 0.5,
and by ICP-s with a significance level of α = 0.01. For a fixed target gene, we take the
intersection of predicted invariant feature sets across 3 random seeds per method. We find
that approximately 42% (27 out of 67) of correct predictions by ICP-s are also identified
by VI-BIP, suggesting some degree of consistency. Moreover, VI-BIP is less conservative
than ICP-s, with a total of 371 correct predictions – about 5.5 times as many as ICP-s.
We also compare our findings with those of Meinshausen et al. [2016]. They use ICP
at a significance level of α = 0.01 after a Lasso pre-screening procedure, followed by
an additional stability selection step [Meinshausen and B¨uhlmann, 2010] applied to 50
In addition, the dataset used in Meinshausen et al.
randomly bootstrapped datasets.
[2016] only has 160 observational samples, whereas the updated version that we use
has 262 observational samples 1. Table 1 gives the results. Most of the verified effects
predicted by VI-BIP, ICP-s, and Meinshausen et al. [2016] are the same.

1The updated dataset can be downloaded at https://deleteome.holstegelab.nl/.

20

0.0000.0010.002Recall0.20.40.6PrecisionMethodLassoEILLS-sHidden-ICP-sICP-sBIP-sVI-BIPTarget gene

Meinshausen et al. [2016]
YMR104C
YMR103C
YPL273W
YMR321C
YCL040W
YCL042W
YLL019C
YLL020C
YMR186W
YPL240C
YBR126C
YDR074W
YMR173W-A YMR173W
YGR162W
YGR264C
YOR027W
YJL077C
YJL115W×
YLR170C

Inferred invariant feature gene(s)

ICP-s (α = 0.01)
YMR104C
YPL273W
YCL040W
YLL019C
YMR186W
∅
YMR173W, YOL100W∗
∅
∅
YDR322C-A∗, YDR180W∗ YJL184W∗, YLR438C-A∗

VI-BIP (t = 0.5)
YMR104C, YHR209W∗
YPL273W
YCL040W
YLL019C
YJL077C, YMR186W
YGR008C∗, YKL035W∗, YDR074W
YMR173W
∅
YLL026W∗, YOR027W, YFL010W-A∗
∅

Table 1: Invariant genes predicted by different methods: ICP from previous findings
[Meinshausen et al., 2016] (left column); our implementation of ICP-s (middle column);
and VI-BIP (right column). We observe consistency in most of their predictions on the
10 target genes selected by Meinshausen et al. [2016]. Genes in blue are validated to have
significant effects on the corresponding target gene; genes marked with a superscript ∗
cannot be checked given existing data. Genes with a superscript × can be checked but do
not have a significant effect; ∅ means no invariant features are predicted by the method.

6 Discussion and future works

We present Bayesian Invariant Prediction (BIP) to infer the subset of features that invari-
antly predict the outcome across diverse environments. For high-dimensional settings, we
develop VI-BIP, a scalable variational algorithm that addresses the exponential complex-
ity of exact inference. We establish theoretical guarantees on posterior consistency and
derive posterior contraction rates that depend both on the amount of data and the het-
erogeneity of the environments. We validate BIP and VI-BIP in both synthetic and real
data studies, demonstrating their accuracy, uncertainty quantification, and scalability.

The fundamental assumptions of BIP are that the multi-environment data generative
process is truly invariant, and that the chosen model class accurately reflects the invariant
prediction mechanism. When these conditions are met, BIP offers a principled way to
identify invariant features and make predictions that are robust to distribution shifts
In practice, when these assumptions may not hold exactly, BIP
across environments.
identifies the most approximately invariant feature set. These results remain valuable for
interpreting the data through a simplified lens and identifying robust features.

BIP also offers a new perspective to invariant prediction in high dimensions. While
previous methods often rely on feature pre-screening or additional regularization terms,
our variational approach VI-BIP provides an optimization-based alternative. Our empir-
ical results that that it achieves higher accuracy, and without being overly conservative.
One limitation BIP is that they rely on fixed estimates of per-environment distribu-
tions, and do not quantify uncertainty around them.
In this work, we use maximum
likelihood estimates and, as a result, the estimation bias can obscure the posterior infer-
ence especially with small sample size. Integrating conditional model estimation into the
overall probabilistic framework is an important avenue of further research.

Another future direction is to explore more expressive conditional model classes and
develop efficient training algorithms. While our method and theory apply generally, our
experiments only considered linear Gaussian models (for computational convenience).
Future work can consider richer model classes, combined with amortized computation.

21

Finally, VI-BIP uses a factorized mean-field variational family, which is effective and
efficient, but may limit posterior expressiveness. A third future direction is to incorporate
advances in variational inference and discrete variable optimization to improve VI-BIP.

References

Jonas Peters, Peter B¨uhlmann, and Nicolai Meinshausen. Causal inference by using
invariant prediction: Identification and confidence intervals. Journal of the Royal Sta-
tistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 78(5):947–1012, 2016.

Jianqing Fan, Cong Fang, Yihong Gu, and Tong Zhang. Environment invariant linear

least squares. arXiv:2303.03092, 2023.

Peter B¨uhlmann. Invariance, causality and robustness. Statistical Science, 35(3):404–426,

2020.

Mateo Rojas-Carulla, Bernhard Sch¨olkopf, Richard Turner, and Jonas Peters. Invariant
models for causal transfer learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 19(36):
1–34, 2018.

Martin Arjovsky, L´eon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk

minimization. arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.

Micheal Jordan, Zoubin Ghahramani, Tommi Jaakkola, and Lawrence Saul. Introduction
to variational methods for graphical models. Machine Learning, 37:183–233, 1999.

David M. Blei, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D McAuliffe. Variational inference: A review for
statisticians. Journal of the American statistical Association, 112(518):859–877, 2017.

Mingzhang Yin, Yixin Wang, and David M. Blei. Optimization-based causal estimation
from heterogeneous environments. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(168):
1–44, 2024.

Dominik Rothenh¨ausler, Peter B¨uhlmann, and Nicolai Meinshausen. Causal Dantzig.

The Annals of Statistics, 47(3):1688–1722, 2019.

Patrick Kemmeren, Katrin Sameith, Loes A. L. van de Pasch, Joris J. Benschop, Tineke L.
Lenstra, Thanasis Margaritis, Eoghan O’Duibhir, Eva Apweiler, Sake van Wagenin-
gen, Cheuk W. Ko, Sebastiaan van Heesch, Mehdi M. Kashani, Giannis Ampatziadis-
Michailidis, Mariel O. Brok, Nathalie A. C. H. Brabers, Anthony J. Miles, Diane
Bouwmeester, Sander R. van Hooff, Harm van Bakel, Erik Sluiters, Linda V. Bakker,
Berend Snel, Philip Lijnzaad, Dik van Leenen, and Marian J. A. Groot Koerkamp.
Large-scale genetic perturbations reveal regulatory networks and an abundance of gene-
specific repressors. Cell, 157(3):740–752, 2014.

Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Sch¨olkopf. Elements of Causal Inference:

Foundations and Learning Algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.

22

Bernhard Sch¨olkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalch-
brenner, Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward causal representation learning.
Proceedings of the IEEE, 109(5):612–634, 2021.

Ragnar Frisch, Trygve Haavelmo, Tjalling C. Koopmans, and Jan Tinbergen. Autonomy
of Economic Relations. Memorandum fra Universitets Socialøkonomiske Institutt. Uni-
versitets Socialøkonomiske Institutt, Oslo, Norway, 1948.

Kevin D. Hoover. Causality in economics and econometrics. In Steven N. Durlauf and
Lawrence E. Blume, editors, The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Palgrave
Macmillan, Basingstoke, UK, 2nd edition, 2008.

Judea Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge University Press,

New York, NY, 2nd edition, 2009.

Christina Heinze-Deml, Jonas Peters, and Nicolai Meinshausen. Invariant causal predic-

tion for nonlinear models. Journal of Causal Inference, 6(2):20170016, 2018.

Zhenyu Wang, Yifan Hu, Peter B¨uhlmann, and Zijian Guo. Causal invariance learning

via efficient optimization of a nonconvex objective. arXiv:2412.11850, 2024.

Yihong Gu, Cong Fang, Yang Xu, Zijian Guo, and Jianqing Fan. Fundamental computa-
tional limits in pursuing invariant causal prediction and invariance-guided regulariza-
tion. arXiv:2501.17354, 2025.

Francisco Madaleno, Pernille Julie Viuff Sand, Francisco C Pereira, and Sergio Her-
nan Garrido Mejia. Bayesian hierarchical invariant prediction. arXiv:2505.11211, 2025.

Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational Bayes. In International

Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.

Rajesh Ranganath, Sean Gerrish, and David Blei. Black box variational inference. In

Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 814–822, 2014.

Mingzhang Yin, Nhat Ho, Bowei Yan, Xiaoning Qian, and Mingyuan Zhou. Probabilistic

best subset selection via gradient-based optimization. arXiv:2006.06448, 2020.

Shakir Mohamed, Mihaela Rosca, Michael Figurnov, and Andriy Mnih. Monte Carlo
gradient estimation in machine learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21
(132):1–62, 2020.

Robert Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal

Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 58(1):267–288, 1996.

Nicolai Meinshausen, Alain Hauser, Joris M. Mooij, Jonas Peters, Philip Versteeg, and
Peter B¨uhlmann. Methods for causal inference from gene perturbation experiments
and validation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(27):7361–7368,
2016.

23

Nicolai Meinshausen and Peter B¨uhlmann. Stability selection. Journal of the Royal

Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 72(4):417–473, 2010.

Leslie N. Smith. Cyclical learning rates for training neural networks.

In 2017 IEEE

Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pages 464–472, 2017.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory
Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Des-
maison, Andreas K¨opf, Edward Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani,
Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala.
Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.

24

Supplementary Material

A Additional Theory and Proofs

In this section we provide additional theoretical results and proofs that are in complement
to § 3.

Notation. We write ∀pa to mean “for p(a)-almost every realization of a” where a is a
random variable a and p(a) is its probability measure.

A.1 Preliminary lemmas

We first introduce two lemmas that are helpful for proofs of the main theorems.

Lemma 1. Let {Xn} be a sequence of random variables where each Xn ∈ Rp and p is
P→ µ for some constant µ ∈ Rp, and define I ∗ := {i : µi =
a fixed number. Assume Xn
µmax} where µmax is value of the largest component(s) of µ and therefore I ∗ is the set of
corresponding indices. Let i∗
n denote the index of the maximal component
of Xn. Then we have

n := arg maxi X (i)

P (i∗

n ∈ I ∗) → 1, as n → ∞.

As a special case, when I ∗ = {i∗ : µi∗ > µj∀j ̸= i∗} is a singleton, we have

i∗
n

P→ i∗, as n → ∞.

Proof By continuous mapping theorem, ∀j ̸∈ I ∗, as n → ∞,

X (i)

n − X (j)
n

P→ µmax − µ(j) > 0.

max
i∈I∗

Hence P (maxi∈I∗ X (i)

n − X (j)
Consequently, as n → ∞,

n < 0) → 0 as n → ∞.

P (i∗

n ̸∈ I ∗) = P (∃j ̸∈ I ∗, max
i∈I∗

and therefore

X (i)

n < X (j)

n ) ≤

(cid:88)

j̸∈I∗

P (max
i∈I∗

X (i)

n − X (j)

n < 0) → 0,

P (i∗

n ∈ I ∗) → 1.

Lemma 2. Let {Xn} be a sequence of random variables such that its sample average Sn
n
converges to some constant µ in probability, where Sn := (cid:80)n
i=1 Xi. When µ < 0, Then

25

we have

And when µ > 0, we have

exp{Sn} P→ 0.

exp{Sn} P→ ∞.

Proof

Suppose µ < 0. ∀ϵ > 0, ∀δ > 0, it suffices to find an N = N (ϵ, δ) such that for n > N ,

P (exp{Sn} < ϵ) = P (

Sn
n

<

1
n

log ϵ) > 1 − δ.

Since Sn
n

P→ µ, for ϵ′ = − µ

2 and δ given above, ∃N ′ = N ′(ϵ′, δ) such that for n > N ′,

P (

Sn
n

< µ + ϵ′) > 1 − δ.

We choose N = max(N ′,

1
µ+ϵ′ log ϵ). For n > N , we have

1
n

log ϵ > µ + ϵ′,

and therefore

P (

Sn
n

<

1
n

log ϵ) > P (

Sn
n

< µ + ϵ′) > 1 − δ.

Next, we consider µ > 0. ∀δ > 0, M > 0, it suffices to find an N = N (M, δ) such that

for n > N ,

P (exp{Sn} > M ) = P (Sn > log M ) > 1 − δ.

Since Sn
n

P→ µ, for ϵ′ = µ

2 and δ given above, ∃N ′ = N ′(ϵ′, δ) such that

P (

Sn
n

> µ − ϵ′) > 1 − δ.

We choose N = max(N,

1
µ−ϵ′ log M ). For n > N, we have

n(µ − ϵ′) > log M

and therefore

P (Sn > log M ) > P (Sn > n(µ − ϵ′) > 1 − δ.

26

Lemma 3. Recall definition of µ(z) in Eq. 9:

µ(z) = Ep(e)pe(xz) [KL [pe(y | xz) ∥ g(y | xz)]] .

We have

µ(z) = 0 ⇔ pe(y | xz) is invariant with respect to e ∀pe∀xz

Proof By the property of KL divergence, we have

µ(z) = 0 ⇔ KL [pe(y | x) ∥ g(y | xz)] = 0 ∀pe∀xz
⇔ pe(y | xz) = g(y | xz) ∀pe∀xz
⇔ pe(y | xz) is invariant to e ∀pe∀xz

A.2 Proof of Theorem 1

Theorem (Posterior consistency) (Restatement of Theorem 1). Suppose Assump-
tions 1 to 4 hold, and take the limits n → ∞ and E → ∞. The BIP posterior satisfies
the following properties:

• consistency of the posterior mode: ˆzn,E := arg maxz ˆp(z | D) P→ z∗

• consistency of the posterior at z∗: ˆp(z∗ | D) P→ 1.

Proof The posterior in Eq. 6 can be re-written as

ˆp(z | D) =

p(z) exp{− ˆSn,E(z)}
z p(z) exp{− ˆSn,E(z)}

(cid:80)

where ˆSn,E(z) is the log-likelihood ratio given z,

ˆSn,E(z) :=

n
(cid:88)

E
(cid:88)

i=1

e=1

By Assumption 4, as n, E → ∞,

log ˆpe(yei | xz

ei) − log ˆg(yei | xz

ei).

1
nE

ˆSn,E(z) P→ Ep(e)pe(y|xz) [log pe(y | xz)] − Ep(e)pe(y|xz) [log g(y | xz)] .

Recall the definition of µ(z) in Eq. 9, the RHS reduces to µ(z) and hence

1
nE

ˆSn,E(z) P→ µ(z).

27

(12)

(13)

(14)

Applying Lemma 1, as n → ∞ and E → ∞

arg max
z:p(z)>0

−

1
nE

ˆSn,E(z) P→ arg max

−µ(z) = z∗,

z:p(z)>0

where the last equality follows from Assumptions 2 and 3 and Lemma 3.

Consequently, the posterior mode is consistent:

ˆzn,E := arg max

z

ˆp(z | D)

log p(z) − ˆSn,E(z)

log p(z) −

1
nE

ˆSn,E(z)

= arg max
z:p(z)>0

= arg max
z:p(z)>0

= arg max
z:p(z)>0

1
nE
1
nE

−

ˆSn,E(z)

(for sufficiently large n, E)

P→ z∗

as n, E → ∞.

Next, we prove the posterior consistency at z∗.
By Assumption 3, p(z∗) > 0. Dividing both the numerator and denominator in the

RHS of Eq. 12 by p(z∗) exp{−Sn,E(z∗)}, the posterior can be expressed as

ˆp(z∗ | D) =

1 + (cid:80)

z̸=z∗ p(z)/p(z∗) · exp{ ˆSn,E(z∗) − ˆSn,E(z)}

1

.

To show ˆp(z∗|D) P→ 1, it suffices to show that ∀pz ̸= z∗,

exp{ ˆSn,E(z∗) − ˆSn,E(z)} P→ 0.

(15)

By Eq. 14, ∀z ̸= z∗,

(cid:104) ˆSn,E(z∗) − ˆSn,E(z)

(cid:105) P→ µ(z∗) − µ(z) < 0.

1
nE

Applying Lemma 2 to the above inequality, Eq. 15 holds. Hence we conclude the proof.

A.3 Proof of Theorem 2

Theorem (Posterior contraction rate) (Restatement of Theorem 2). Given Assump-
tions 1 to 5, there exists a sequence ϵn,E = O(R · e−κnEµmin) such that

(cid:32)

P

(cid:16)

TV

ˆp(z | D), δz∗(z)

(cid:17)

(cid:33)

> ϵn,E

→ 0

28

as n → ∞ and E → ∞, where

(cid:18)

R =

max
z̸=z∗

(cid:19)

p(z)
p(z∗)

· |supp(p(z))|,

µ(z) := Ep(e)pe(xz) [KL [pe(y | xz) ∥ g(y | xz))]] ,
µmin :=

¯µ(z),

min
z̸=z∗,z∈supp(p(z))

(16)

(17)

(18)

and κ is a fixed value in (0, 1).

Proof Based on the expression of the posterior in Eq. 12, we have the following lower
bound on the posterior value at z∗

ˆp(z∗ | D) ≥

1

1 + Rmax

(cid:80)

z̸=z∗ exp{ ˆSn,E(z∗) − ˆSn,E(z)}

.

(19)

where Rmax := maxz̸=z∗

p(z)
p(z∗) .

We decompose ˆSn,E(z) as follows:

ˆSn,E(z) = Sn,E(z) + Bn,E(z)

where

Sn,E(z) :=

E
(cid:88)

ne(cid:88)

e=1

i=1

log pe(yei | xz

ei) − log g(yei | xz

ei),

(20)

(21)

is the log-likelihood ratio under the true model, and

Bn,E(z) := ˆSn,E(z) − Sn,E(z)

is the estimation bias of the log-likelihood ratios.

Step 1. We first show the concentration behavior of Sn,E(z∗) − Sn,E(z).

For any z ̸= z∗ and any k > 0, by Chebyshev’s inequality we have

(cid:18)

P

| Sn,E(z∗) − Sn,E(z) − E [Sn,E(z∗) − Sn,E(z)] | ≥ k

(cid:19)

≤

Var [Sn,E(z∗) − Sn,E(z)]
k2

.

(22)

Note that by definitions of µ(z) and v(z),

E [Sn,E(z)] = nEµ(z),

Var [Sn,E(z)] = nEv(z).

Furthermore we have

E [Sn,E(z∗) − Sn,E(z)] = µ(z∗) − µ(z) < 0

(23)

29

by Assumption 2, and

Var [Sn,E(z∗) − Sn,E(z)] ≤ 2nEvmax

(24)

where vmax := maxz v(z) < ∞ by Assumption 5.

Setting k = (1 − κ)nEµ(z) for a fixed value κ ∈ (0, 1), and substituting the expres-
sions for the mean and variance from Eq. 23 and Eq. 24 into Eq. 22, we obtain

(cid:18)

P

| Sn,E(z∗) − Sn,E(z) + nEµ(z)| ≥ (1 − κ)nEµ(z)

(cid:19)

≤

2vmax
nE(1 − κ)2µ(z)2 .

(25)

Step 2. We then show the concentration behavior of Bn,E(z∗) − Bn,E(z).

By Assumption 4 and LLN, as n → ∞ and E → ∞, each estimation bias ˆBn,E(z)
goes to 0, and so

1
nE

[Bn,E(z∗) − Bn,E(z)] P→ 0.

(26)

Step 3. Having characterized the concentration behaviors of Sn,E(z) and Bn,E(z), we are

now ready to prove the posterior contraction rate.

We define the rate ϵn,E as follows

ϵn,E := 1 −

1
1 + Re−κnEµmin

= O(R · e−κnEµmin).

Our goal is to show

(cid:16)

P

TV

(cid:16)

p(z | D), δz∗(z)

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

> ϵn,E

→ 0,

as n → ∞ and E → ∞.

Recall TV

(cid:16)

p(z | D), δz∗(z)

(cid:17)

= 1 − p(z∗|D), if suffices to show that

(cid:32)

P

(cid:18)
ˆp

z∗ | D

(cid:19)

(cid:33)

< 1 − ϵn,E

P→ 0,

as n → ∞ and E → ∞.

30

Using the inequality that lower bounds p(z∗ | D) from Eq. 19, we have

(cid:32)

P

(cid:18)
ˆp

z∗ | D

(cid:19)

< 1 − ϵn,E

(cid:33)

1

(cid:32)

(cid:32)

≤ P

= P

1 + Rmax

(cid:80)

z̸=z∗ exp{ ˆSn,E(z∗) − ˆSn,E(z)}

1

(cid:80)

z̸=z∗ exp{Sn,E(z∗) − Sn,E(z)}

1

1 + Rmax
(cid:32)

+ P

1 + Rmax

(cid:80)

z̸=z∗ exp{Sn,E(z∗) − Sn,E(z)}

(cid:33)

< 1 − ϵn,E

(cid:33)

< 1 − ϵn,E | Ac

n,E

P (Ac

n,E)

(cid:33)

< 1 − ϵn,E | An,E

P (An,E)

(27)

where An,E is the event that ∃z ̸= z∗ such that |Sn,E(z∗) − Sn,E(z) + nEµ(z)| ≥
2(1 − κ)nEµ(z) or |Bn,E(z∗) − Bn,E(z)| ≥ 1
1
n,E denotes the
complement of An,E.

2(1 − κ)nEµ(z), and Ac

We consider the following two cases:

(a) Given the event An,E, by definition of An,E and the subadditivity of probability

measure, we have

P (An,E) ≤

(cid:88)

(cid:110)

P

z̸=z∗

(cid:18)

|Sn,E(z∗) − Sn,E(z) + nEµ(z)| ≥

(1 − κ)nEµ(z)|

(cid:19)

1
2

(cid:18)

+ P

|Bn,E(z∗) − Bn,E(z)| ≥

(1 − κ)nEµ(z)

(cid:19) (cid:111)
.

1
2

As n → ∞ and E → ∞, the first term in the summation on the RHS of the
inequality converges to zero by Eq. 25 from Step 1, and the term converges to
0 as well by Eq. 26 from Step 2. Thus,

P (An,E) → 0,

as n → ∞ and E → ∞.

(28)

(b) Given the complement event Ac

1

2(1 − κ)nEµ(z), and |Bn,E(z∗) − Bn,E(z)| < 1
inequality and the decomposition of ˆSn,E(z) in Eq. 20, we have

n,E, ∀z ̸= z∗ both |Sn,E(z∗)−Sn,E(z)+nEµ(z)| <
2(1 − κ)nEµ(z). By the triangle

| ˆSn,E(z∗) − ˆSn,E(z∗) + nEµ(z)|
= |Sn,E(z∗) − Sn,E(z) + nEµ(z) + Bn,E(z∗) − Bn,E(z)| < (1 − κ)nEµ(z).

Hence, Ac

n,E implies that

ˆSn,E(z∗) − ˆSn,E < −κnEµ(z),

∀z ̸= z∗

31

which further implies

1 + Rmax

(cid:80)

z̸=z∗ exp{Sn,E(z∗) − Sn,E(z)}

1

>

>

1

(cid:80)

1 + Rmax

z̸=z∗ exp{−κnEµ(z)}
1
1 + R exp{−κnEµmin}

= 1 − ϵn,E

where the last inequality follows from the definitions of R and µmin in Eq. 16
and Eq. 18, respectively.

Therefore,

(cid:32)

P

1 + Rmax

(cid:80)

z̸=z∗ exp{Sn,E(z∗) − Sn,E(z)}

1

(cid:33)

< 1 − ϵn,E | Ac

n,E

= 0.

(29)

Combining the analysis in these two cases, namely Eq. 28 and Eq. 29, with Eq. 27
we prove the final contraction rate result: as n → ∞ and E → ∞,

(cid:32)

P

(cid:18)
ˆp

z∗ | D

(cid:19)

(cid:33)

< 1 − ϵn,E

→ 0.

A.4 Theory extensions to finite n and finite E cases

We present extensions of Theorems 1 and 2 to two separate cases: (1) E is held fixed while
letting n → ∞, and (2) n is held fixed while letting E → ∞. These results corroborate
the first part of § 3.2.

Case 1: E fixed and n → ∞. Given fixed E environments Eobs = {1, · · · , E}, we set
the collection of environments of interests E to Eobs. Importantly, the pooled conditional
g(y | xz) in Definition 1 and Assumption 1, which depend on E, should adapt to Eobs
(cid:80)E
accordingly. We also re-define p(e) = 1
e′=1 δe′(e) as a uniform distribution over the
E
finite set Eobs, and any expectation with respect to p(e) should be re-interpreted.

We then make the following assumption:

Assumption 6 (Estimation consistency given fixed environments). Given fixed E envi-
ronments Eobs, ∀pz, as n → ∞,

1
nE

1
nE

n
(cid:88)

E
(cid:88)

log ˆpe(yei | xz

ei) P→ Ep(e)pe(y|xz) [log pe(y | xz)] ,

i=1
n
(cid:88)

e=1
E
(cid:88)

i=1

e=1

log ˆg(yei | xz

ei) P→ Eg(y|xz) [log g(y | xz)] .

32

Theorem 3 (Posterior consistency given infinite per-environment samples). Given fixed
E environments E, and Assumptions 1 to 3 and 6, as n → ∞, we have

• posterior mode consistency, i.e. ˆzn,E := arg maxz ˆp(z | D) P→ z∗, and

• posterior consistency at z∗, i.e. ˆp(z∗ | D) P→ 1.

Theorem 4 (Posterior contraction rate given infinite per-environment samples). Given
Assumptions 1 to 3, 6 and 5, there exists a sequence ϵn,E = O(R · e−κnEµmin) such that

(cid:32)

P

(cid:16)

TV

p(z | D), δz∗(z)

(cid:17)

(cid:33)

> ϵn,E

→ 0

as n → ∞, where R and µmin are defined in Eq. 8 and Eq. 10, respectively, and κ is a
fixed value in (0, 1).

Assumption 4 is a modification of Assumption 4 where we only require the estimation

consistency with respect to n within E environments.

The proofs of Theorems 3 and 4 are essentially the same as the proofs of Theorems 1
and 2, respectively, except that E is now held fixed, only taking n → ∞. Hence we
abbreviate them here.

Case 2: n fixed and E → ∞.
In this case, we consider a similar setting as in the
main theorems where E environments are sampled from p(e) – a uniform distribution
over E. Given the drawn E environments, we relabel them by e = 1, · · · , E. And in each
environment e, we draw n observations xei, yei i.i.d. from pe(x, y) for i = 1, · · · , n.

Assumption 7 (Estimation consistency of pooled conditional given fixed n). Given fixed
n, ∀pz, as E → ∞,

1
n

1
E

n
(cid:88)

E
(cid:88)

i=1

e=1

log ˆg(yei | xz

ei) P→ Ep(e)pe(xz,y) [log g(y | xz)] .

Assumption 8 (Identifiability of z∗ under estimation bias). z∗ minimizes µn(z) defined
as follows

µn(z) := Ep(e)pe(xz)KL [pe(y | xz) ∥ g(y | xz))]
(cid:125)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
:=model discrepancy µ(z)

(cid:124)

+

1
n
(cid:124)

Ep(e) (cid:81)n

i=1 pe(xi,yi)

n
(cid:88)

[log ˆpz

e(yi; xz

i ) − log pe(yi | xz

i )]
,

i=1

(cid:123)(cid:122)
:=estimation bias of per-environment conditionals bn(z)

(cid:125)

(30)

Theorem 5 (Posterior consistency given infinite environments). Given fixed n and As-
sumptions 1 to 3, 7 and 8, as E → ∞, we have

1. posterior mode consistency, i.e. ˆzn,E

P→ z∗

33

2. posterior consistency at z∗, i.e. ˆp(z∗ | D) P→ 1.

Assumption 7 ensures that the pooled model is consistently estimated given infinite
environments, given finite data in each environments. This assumption is reasonable, as
we view each observation (xei, yei) as i.i.d. copy from the pooled distribution g(x, y) :=
(cid:82) p(e)pe(x, y)de.

Assumption 8 is a non-trivial assumption – it requires that the invariant z∗ mini-
mizes the combined value of model discrepancy µ(z) and local model estimation bias
bn(z). Since z∗ minimizes µ(z) by Assumption 2, Assumption 8 is satisfied whenever
the estimation bias is well-controlled, for example, if maxz |bn(z)| < minz:z̸=z∗ µ(z). In
practice, when the per-environment sample size n is sufficiently large, the estimation bias
becomes negligible, so that Assumption 8 is expected to hold.

Incorporating these two assumptions, Theorem 5 establishes posterior consistency in
the infinite environment regime. The proof follows the same structure as the proof of
Theorem 1.
Proof ∀z, by law of large number (LLN), as E → ∞

1
nE

n
(cid:88)

E
(cid:88)

i=1

e=1

[log ˆpe(yei | xz

ei) − log pe(yei | xz

ei)] P→ bn(z),

n
(cid:88)

E
(cid:88)

log g(y | xz) P→ Ep(e)pe(xz,y) [log g(y | xz)] ,

(31)

1
nE

1
nE

i=1
n
(cid:88)

e=1
E
(cid:88)

i=1

e=1

log pe(y | xz) P→ Ep(e)pe(xz,y) [log pe(y | xz)] .

By Assumption 7 and Eq. 31, and recall the definitions of of µ(z) in Eq. 9 and ˆSn,E(z)

in Eq. 13, we have ∀pz,

1
nE

ˆSn,E(z) P→ µn(z)

(32)

Applying Lemma 1, as E → ∞

arg max
z:p(z)>0

−

1
nE

ˆSn,E(z) P→ arg max

−µn(z) = z∗,

z:p(z)>0

where the last equality follows from Assumption 8.

34

Using the posterior expression in Eq. 12, we show that the posterior mode is consistent:

ˆzn,E := arg max

z

ˆp(z | D)

log p(z) − ˆSn,E(z)

log p(z) −

1
nE

ˆSn,E(z)

ˆSn,E(z)

= arg max
z:p(z)>0

= arg max
z:p(z)>0

= arg max
z:p(z)>0

P→ z∗.

1
nE
1
nE

−

Next, we prove the posterior consistency at z∗.

By Assumption 3, p(z∗) > 0. Dividing both the numerator and denominator in the
RHS of the posterior expression in Eq. 12 by p(z∗) exp{−Sn,E(z∗)}, the posterior reduces
to

ˆp(z∗ | D) =

1 + (cid:80)

z̸=z∗ p(z)/p(z∗) · exp{ ˆSn,E(z∗) − ˆSn,E(z)}

1

.

(33)

To show ˆp(z∗|D) P→ 1 as E → ∞, it suffices to show that ∀pz ̸= z∗,

exp{ ˆSn,E(z∗) − ˆSn,E(z)} P→ 0.

(34)

By Eq. 32, ∀z ̸= z∗, as E → ∞,

(cid:104) ˆSn,E(z∗) − ˆSn,E(z)

(cid:105) P→ µn(z∗) − µn(z) < 0.

1
nE

Applying Lemma 2 to the above inequality, Eq. 34 holds. Hence we conclude the proof.

Next we establish the contraction rate result. Since the local model estimation bias

is non-negligible, we need an additional assumption on its variance:

Assumption 9 (Finite variance of estimation bias in per-environment models). For any
fixed n, the variance of the estimation bias of per-environment conditionals

vn(z) := Varp(e) (cid:81)n

i=1 pe(yi|xz
i )

(cid:34) n

(cid:88)

i=1

exists and is finite.

(log ˆpe(yi | xz

i ) − log pe(yi | xz

(cid:35)
i ))

Theorem 6 (Contraction rate given infinite environments). Given Assumptions 1 to 3,
7, 8, 5 and 9, for any fixed n, there exists a sequence ϵn,E = O(Re−κnEµmin) such that

(cid:32)

P

TV

(cid:16)

p(z | D), δz∗(z)

(cid:17)

(cid:33)

> ϵn,E

→ 0

(35)

35

as E → ∞, where R and µmin are defined in Eq. 8 and Eq. 10, respectively, and κ is a
fixed value in (0, 1).

Proof We consider the same posterior lower bound in Eq. 19, and decompose ˆSn,E(z)
as follows

ˆSn,E(z) = Sn,E(z) + B(1)

n,E(z) − B(2)

n,E(z),

where Sn,E(z) is the log-likelihood ratio under the true model in Eq. 21, and

B(1)

n,E(z) =

B(2)

n,E(z) =

n
(cid:88)

E
(cid:88)

i=1
n
(cid:88)

e=1
E
(cid:88)

i=1

e=1

log ˆpe(yei | xz

ei) − log pe(yei | xz
ei)

log ˆg(yei | xz

ei) − log g(yei | xz
ei)

are the estimation biases of log-likelihood ratios of local and pooled models, respectively.

We follow a similar 3-step proof strategy as in the proof of Theorem 2.

Step 1. We first show the concentration behavior of dn,E(z∗, z) := Sn,E(z∗) + B(1)

n,E(z∗) −

Sn,E(z) − B(1)

n,E(z) with respect to E.

For any fixed κ ∈ (0, 1), by Chebyshev’s inequality, ∀z ̸= z∗,

(cid:12)
(cid:16)(cid:12)
(cid:12)dn,E(z∗, z) − E[dn,E(z∗, z)]
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12) ≥

P

1 − κ
2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
E[dn,E(z∗, z)]
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:17)

≤

Var [dn,E(z∗, z)]
(1 − κ)2/4 · E[dn,E(z∗, z)]2 .

Note that

E[dn,E(z∗, z)] = −nEµn(z, z∗)

where µn(z, z∗) := µn(z) − µn(z∗) > 0 by Assumption 8, and

Var[dn,E(z∗, z)] ≤ 2nEvn,max,

(36)

(37)

(38)

where vn,max := maxz vn(z) + maxz v(z) is finite given Assumptions 5 and 9.

Substituting Eq. 37 and Eq. 38 into Eq. 36, we have

(cid:12)
(cid:16)(cid:12)
(cid:12)dn,E(z∗, z) + nEµn(z, z∗)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12) ≥

P

1 − κ
2

(cid:17)
nEµn(z, z∗)

≤

2vn,max
nE(1 − κ)2/4µn(z, z∗)2 .
(39)

Step 2. We then show the concentration behavior of B(2)

n,E(z∗) − B(2)

n,E(z) with respect to E.

By Assumption 7 and LLN, ∀z, as E → ∞,

1
nE

B(2)

n,E(z∗) − B(2)

n,E(z) P→ 0.

36

(40)

Step 3. Having characterized the above concentration behaviors, we now prove the contrac-

tion rate defined as

ϵn,E := 1 −

1
1 + Re−κnEµmin

= O(R · e−κnEµmin).

We define An,E be the event that ∃z ̸= z∗ such that |dn,E(z∗, z) + nEµn(z, z∗)| ≥
2 nEµn(z, z∗), or |B(2)
1−κ
Following a similar analysis in the proof of Theorem 2, we can show that as E → ∞

2 nEµn(z, z∗).

n,E(z∗) − B(2)

n,E(z)| ≥ 1−κ

(cid:32)

P

TV

(cid:16)

ˆp(z | D), δz∗(z)

(cid:17)

(cid:33)

> ϵn,E

= P

(cid:32)

(cid:18)
ˆp

z∗ | D

(cid:19)

(cid:33)

< 1 − ϵn,E

≤ P (An,E) → 0

where the last convergence follows from Eq. 39 and Eq. 40.

A.5 Theory generalization under relaxed assumptions

We provide a generalization of Theorem 1 under more general conditions. This result
supports the second part of § 3.2 where some of the original assumptions are violated.

We define the best-fitting local model ¯pe(y | xz) and pooled model ¯g(y | xz) within

the chosen model class Py|xz :

¯pe(y | xz) := arg max
˜p(y|xz)∈Py|xz
¯g(y | xz) := arg max
˜p(y|xz)∈Py|xz

Epe(x,y) log ˜p(y | xz),

∀e, z

Epe(x,y) log ˜p(yei | xz

ei),

∀z,

(cid:88)

e∈E

and the expected discrepancy between them

¯µ(z) := Ep(e)pe(x,y) [log ¯pe(y | xz) − log ¯g(y | xz)] .

(41)

Theorem 7 (Posterior consistency under general conditions). Let ¯Z ∗ be the set of min-
imizer(s) of ¯µ(z) defined in Eq. 41. Assume that p( ¯Z ∗) > 0, and ∀pz, as n → ∞ and
E → ∞,

n
(cid:88)

E
(cid:88)

log ˆpe(yei | xz

ei) P→ Ep(e)pe(y,xz) [log ¯pe(y | xz)] ,

1
nE

and

1
nE

i=1
n
(cid:88)

e=1
E
(cid:88)

i=1

e=1

log ˆg(yei | xz

ei) P→ Ep(e)pe(y,xz) [log ¯g(y | xz)] .

(42)

Then as n → ∞ and E → ∞, we have

• P (ˆzn,E ∈ ¯Z ∗) → 1,

37

• ˆp( ¯Z ∗ | D) P→ 1.

Theorem 7 extends the posterior consistency result in Theorem 1 to a more general
setting. The positive prior condition is now imposed on the set of minimizers ¯Z ∗ of
the discrepancy measure between the best-fitting local and pooled models. Similarly, the
estimation consistency condition in Eq. 42 is adapted to these models as well. As a result,
the posterior concentrates on ¯Z ∗, which can be interpreted as the most approximately
invariant feature selectors.

Theorem 1 can be viewed as a special instance of Theorem 7 under stricter assump-
tions: the model is correctly specified, and the exact invariant feature selector z∗ exists,
is unique and has positive prior mass. The proof follows a similar structure as that of
Theorem 1.
Proof We recall the posterior expression

ˆp(z | D) =

p(z) exp{− ˆSn,E(z)}
z p(z) exp{− ˆSn,E(z)}

(cid:80)

where ˆSn,E(z) is the log-likelihood ratio given z,

ˆSn,E(z) :=

n
(cid:88)

E
(cid:88)

i=1

e=1

By our assumption, as n, E → ∞,

log ˆpe(yei | xz

ei) − log ˆg(yei | xz

ei).

1
nE

ˆSn,E(z) P→ Ep(e)pe(y|xz) [log ¯pe(y | xz)] − Ep(e)pe(y|xz) [log ¯g(y | xz)] = ¯µ(z).

(43)

For large nE, we have

ˆzn,E := arg max

z

ˆp(z | D)

= arg max
z:p(z)>0

log p(z) − ˆSn,E(z)

= arg max
z:p(z)>0

−

1
nE

ˆSn,E(z).

By Lemma 1 and Eq. 43, as n → ∞ and E → ∞

P (ˆzn,E ∈ ¯Z ∗) → 1.

where we recall ¯Z ∗ is the set of minimizers of ¯µ(z).

Next, we consider any z ̸∈ ¯Z ∗ with p(z) > 0. Then

ˆp(z | D) ≤

=

p(z) exp{− ˆSn,E(z)}

p(z) exp{− ˆSn,E(z)} + (cid:80)
1

z′∈ ¯Z ∗ p(z′) exp{− ˆSn,E(z′)}

1 + (cid:80)

z′∈ ¯Z ∗ p(z′)/p(z) exp{ ˆSn,E(z) − ˆSn,E(z′)}

38

.

Algorithm 3: U2G gradient estimation [Yin et al., 2020]

Input: Objective function f , dataset D, variational parameter ϕ
Output: A random unbiased estimate ˆg of ∇ϕEqϕ(z) [f (z, D, ϕ)]

i=1 Uniform[0, 1]

1 Draw u ∼ (cid:81)p
2 z1 ← 1 [u > 1 − sigmoid(ϕ)] , z2 ← 1 [u < sigmoid(ϕ)]
3 ˆg ← 1

2sigmoid(|ϕ|) · [f (z1, D, ϕ) − f (z2, D, ϕ)] · (z1 − z2)

Note that by our assumption, ∀z′ ∈ ¯Z ∗,

(cid:16) ˆSn,E(z) − ˆSn,E(z′)

(cid:17) P→ ¯µ(z) − ¯µ(z′) > 0,

1
nE

and consequently by Lemma 2, we have exp{ ˆSn,E(z) − ˆSn,E(z′)} P→ ∞.
Consequently, ∀z ̸∈ ¯Z ∗, ˆp(z | D) P→ 0, and therefore ˆp( ¯Z ∗ | D) P→ 1.

B Details on VI-BIP

We provide additional details on VI-BIP, including gradient estimation, optimization
guidelines and implementation considerations.

B.1 Gradient estimators for binary latent variables

Optimizing VI-BIP requires computing gradients of the ELBO in Eq. 7, which involves
expectations with respect to the discrete variational distribution qϕ(z). To obtain an
unbiased gradient estimate, we use the U2G estimator proposed by Yin et al. [2020].

Algorithm 3 describes the general U2G estimator for computing an unbiased estimate
of ∇ϕEqϕ(z)[f (z, D, ϕ)], given an objective function f , dataset D, and variational param-
eters ϕ. The algorithm constructs a single gradient estimate using pair of correlated
samples z1 and z2 to reduce variance while maintaining unbiasedness. Multiple gradient
estimates can be obtained by independently repeating this procedure, and their average
is used to form the final gradient estimate.

To use U2G in our setting (Algorithm 2), the objective function corresponds to the

integrand inside the ELBO expression from Eq. 7, that is,

f (z, D, ϕ) := [log p(z) +

E
(cid:88)

ne(cid:88)

e=1

i=1

log

ˆg(yei | xz
ei)
ˆpe(yei | xz
ei)

− log qϕ(z),

(44)

where we replace the true pooled and local conditionals in the ELBO with estimated
counterparts.

39

B.2 Optimization guidelines

We provide guidelines for setting and tuning the hyperparameters. All of these hyperpa-
rameters can be tuned by monitoring the training-set ELBO and the overall optimization
behavior. In general, we expect a graduallly increasing ELBO trend during training, with
higher ELBO values indicating better model fit. We refer to experiment sections for exact
configurations used in each setting.

The key hyperparameters are as follows:

• Number of stochastic gradient samples M : At each iteration, we estimate the gra-
dient of the ELBO using M samples. Increasing M can reduce the variance but
increase the computational cost. In our experiments, we found that using M be-
tween 10 and 20 strikes a good balance between performance and computational
cost.

• Prior p(z): The choice of prior is crucial in high-dimensional settings, as it influ-
ences the sparsity of the inferred invariant sets and the initialization of variational
parameters (see below). We recommend restricting the prior support to feature
subset at size at most pmax, which can be informed by the domain knowledge. In
practice, we found that the choice of pmax can affect optimization dynamics and can
be treated as a tunable hyperparameter.

• Initialization of variational parameters ϕ: The variational parameters ϕ are initial-
ized to ensure that the expected number of invariant features is within the prior
support. Specifically, we recommend initializing ϕ at ϕ0 such that

Eqϕ0 (z) [∥z∥0∥] ≤ max

z:p(z)>0

∥z∥0.

• Optimizer: We use stochastic gradient descent (SGD) throughout all experiments,

following the practice of the original U2G paper [Yin et al., 2020].

• Learning rate scheduling: We use a cyclical learning rate scheduler [Smith, 2017] to
encourage mode exploration. However, alternative schedulers could be explored.

• Number of optimization steps: The number of optimization steps should be chosen
based on the problem scale and convergence behavior. In our experiments, we set
a fixed budget for the total number of optimization steps and select the iteration
with the highest training-set ELBO.

B.3

Implementation details

We discuss several algorithmic techniques for Algorithm 2 that offer practical benefits.

• Analytical KL gradients: The ELBO in Eq. 7 can be decomposed into an expected

40

likelihood term and a KL regularization term (up to a constant C)

L(D, ϕ) = Eqϕ(z)

(cid:34) E
(cid:88)

ne(cid:88)

e=1

i=1

(cid:35)

log

g(yei | xz
ei)
pe(yei | xz
ei)

+ KL [qϕ(z) ∥ p(z)] + C,

Notably, under a uniform prior, the KL regularization term admits a closed-form
gradient expression:

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
∇ϕKL [qϕ(z) ∥ p(z)] = [log(σ) − log(1 − σ)] σ(1 − σ)
(cid:12)σ= 1

1+e−ϕ

To balance variance reduction with the implicit generalization behavior of stochastic
gradients, we can consider a hybrid strategy: at each iteration, with some prob-
ability, we compute the analytical gradient of the KL term; otherwise, we use its
stochastic estimate via the U2G estimator in Algorithm 3. The gradient of the re-
(cid:105)
construction term, ∇ϕEqϕ(z)
, is always estimated by U2G.

(cid:104)(cid:80)E

(cid:80)ne

i=1 log g(yei|xz
ei)
pe(yei|xz
ei)

e=1

• Informative prior: In settings where the prior imposes a maximum number of invari-
ant features pmax or restricts the support with in other ways, we design a tractable
optimization procedure that enforces thes constraints.

Specifically, during each U2G estimation step, we draw a pair of correlated samples
of z (Algorithm 3, Line 2). Since the variational distribution does not explicitly
encode prior constraints, it is possible for some sampled z to fall outside of the prior
support, resulting in an infeasible objective value in Eq. 44, where log p(z) = −∞.

To address this issue, we manually assign a fixed, low objective value for infeasible
z samples, to guide the optimization to toward high-objective regions within the
feasible support. This penalty can be tuned for the specific task, typically by
referencing the range of feasible objective values. In all of our experiments, we set
this penalty value to −1.

C Synthetic data study

We first describe the general data generative process for the experiments in § 4.1 and 4.3,
and then we provide details for each experiment in Supplementary Sections C.1 to C.3.

1. The factorization of the joint distribution. To simulate multi-environment
data, we specify a series of joint distributions that factorize consistently across
environments:

p(x(1:p), y) =

p+1
(cid:89)

i=1

p(t(i) | t(1:i−1)),

where permutation π is drawn uniformly over [1, · · · , p + 1], and t(i) = x(π(i)) if

41

π(i) ̸= p + 1 and t(i) = y otherwise. 2 For convenience, we define t(1:0) to be an
empty conditioning set.

Each conditional density is a linear Gaussian family, that is,

pe(t(i) | t(1:i−1)) = N (t(i) | α⊤

eit(1:i−1) + βei, σ2

ei),

for some parameters αei ∈ Ri−1, βei, σei ∈ R. For i = 1 we set pe(t(1) | t(1:0)) =
e1) with parameters βe1, σe1 ∈ R. (For convenience, t(1:0) denotes an
N (t(1) | βe1, σ2
empty vector.)

We next specify the joint distributions corresponding to different environments.

2. Observational environment (e = 1). For i = 1, · · · , p + 1:

• sample the intercept parameter β1i from N (0, 1),
• sample the variance parameter σ2

ei from Uniform ([σ2

min, σ2

max]), where σ2

min and

σ2
max are lower and upper bounds on the variance parameter,

• sample each dimension of the linear coefficient parameter αei independently:

– if π(i) = p+1, i.e. t(i) = y, first sample its absolute value from Uniform ([lb, ub])

and then assign a random sign;

– if π(i) ̸= p+1 i.e. t(i) = x(π(i)), (i) with probability pact ∈ [0, 1] first sample
its absolute value from Uniform ([lb, ub]) and then assign a random sign,
(ii) otherwise set to 0.

3. Interventional Environments (e = 2, · · · , E) For each interventional environ-
ment e > 1, we first randomly draw a fraction ρint
e ⊂ x to be in-
tervened on – referred to as the intervention strength in the main text. Then, for
e, we set pe(t(i) | t(1:i−1)) = p1(t(i) | t(1:i−1)); otherwise, we
i = 1, · · · , p + 1, if t(i) ̸∈ x′
draw new parameters for pe(t(i) | t(1:i−1)) as follows

e of features x′

• sample the intercept parameter βei by first sampling its absolute value from
N (me, 1) and assigning to it a random sign, for some me ∈ R specific to the
environment e.

• sample the variance parameter σ2

λ ∼ Uniform([λe,min, λe,min +λe,diff]), and then setting σ2
λe,diff are parameters specific to the environment e.

ei by first sampling a multiplicative factor
1i, where λe,min,

ei = λ2σ2

• sample each dimension of the linear coefficient parameter αei independently:

– with probability pchange, copy the corresponding coefficient from e = 1 case

– with probability 1 − pchange, (i) with probability pact sample its absolute
value from Uniform ([lbe, ube]), assign a random sign and (ii) otherwise set
to 0.

2If there are pre-specified lower bound p∗

min and upper bound p∗

features ∥z∗∥0, we keep uniformly sampling π until we get a π such that p∗

max on the number of the true invariant
min < π−1(p + 1) ≤ p∗
max + 1.

42

4. Draw data. Finally, we can draw n data points {xei, yei}n

i=1 from each environment

e independently, for e = 1, · · · , E.

C.1 Empirical verification of theory

We include simulation details for the experiments in § 4.1. We follow the general data gen-
erative process described in the preamble of Supplementary Section C with the following
configuration:

max = 3, p∗

We set p = 3, p∗
min = 1, and pact = 1.
For e = 1, we set lb = 0.5, ub = 2; pact = 1.0, σmin = 0.1 and σmax = 0.2.
For e = 2, · · · , E, we sample me ∼ Uniform([0, 1]), λe,min ∼ Uniform([0.1, 0.2]), and
λe,diff ∼ Uniform([0.1, 0.5]), and we set lbe = (me + 0.01)2, ube = (me + 0.5)2, and
pchange = 1.

C.2 Uncertainty quantification in limited environments

We provide the data generative process for the experiment in § 4.2, and include additional
examples. All experiments are simulated with n = 200 per-environment samples.

Example 1. We provide the data generative process for the experiment in § 4.2. The
joint distributions {pe(x, y)}3

e=1 factorize as follows

p1(x, y) = p1(x(1))p(y | x(1))p1(x(2) | y)
p2(x, y) = p2(x(1))p(y | x(1))p2(x(2) | y)
p3(x, y) = p3(x(1))p(y | x(1))p3(x(2) | x(1), y)

where

p1(x(1)) = N (x(1) | 0, 0.12), p2(x(1)) = N (x(1) | 2, 0.12), p3(x(1)) = N (x(1) | 5, 0.12),
p(y | x(1)) = N (y | x(1) + 0.5, 0.12),
p1(x(2) | y) = p2(x(2) | y) = N (x(2) | y + 0.1, 0.12),
p3(x(2) | x(1), y) = N (x(2) | x(1) + y + 0.1, 0.12).

Considering only the first two environments (p1(x, y), p2(x, y)), both x(1) and x(1:2) are
invariant features. As a result, the posterior places mass on both z = [1, 0] and z = [1, 1],
as shown in Figure 2 (left). When the third environment (p3(x, y)) is introduced, only x(1)
remains invariant, and the posterior consequently concentrates on z = [1, 0], as shown in
Figure 2 (right).

In addition, we include the following two examples where there exist multiple invariant
solutions in limited number of environments. In both cases, when E = 2, there are two
sets of invariant features within the first two environments; but after we include a third
environment, only one set of invariant features remains. We observe similar uncertainty
quantification behaviors as in Example 1.

43

Figure S1: Synthetic study (Example 2): uncertainty quantification with p = 2 features.
With E = 2 environments (left), the posterior ˆp(z | D) is multi-modal over invariant
selectors z = [1, 0] and [1, 1]. For E = 3 (right), only z = [1, 1] remains invariant, and the
posterior concentrates at this solution. All results are averaged over 1,000 simulations
with 95% confidence bands.

Example 2. The joint distributions {pe(x, y)}3

e=1 are given by

p1(x, y) = p1(x(1))p1(x(2))p(y | x(1), x(2))
p2(x, y) = p2(x(1))p2(x(2))p(y | x(1), x(2))
p3(x, y) = p3(x(1))p3(x(2))p(y | x(1), x(2))

where

p1(x(1)) = N (x(1) | 0, 0.12), p2(x(1)) = N (x(1) | 2, 0.12), p3(x(1)) = N (x(1) | 5, 0.12)
p1(x(2)) = p2(x(2)) = N (x(2) | 0.5, 0.12),
p(y | x(1), x(2)) = N (y | x(1) + x(2) + 0.1, 0.12).

p3(x(2)) = N (x(2) | −0.5, 0.12)

x(1:2) is the only set of invariant features across E = {1, 2, 3} with z∗ = [1, 1] the
invariant feature selector. But within the first two environments E ′ = {1, 2}, z = [1, 0] is
also an invariant feature selector: By Definition 1, the pooled conditional within E ′ is

gE ′(y | x(1)) :=

(cid:80)

e∈E ′
(cid:80)

(cid:82) p(e)pe(x, y) dx(2)
e∈E ′ p(e)pe(x(1))

(cid:82) 1

(cid:90) 1
2

=

=

2p1(x(1))p1(x(2))p(y | x(1), x(2)) + 1
2p1(x(1)) + 1

1

2p1(x(2))

2p2(x(1))p2(x(2))p(y | x(1), x(2)) dx(2)

p1(x(2))p(y | x(1), x(2)) +

1
2

p2(x(2))p(y | x(1), x(2)) dx(2)

= p1(y | x(1)) = p2(y | x(1)).,

where the last equality follows from p1(x(2)) = p2(x(2)). This result shows that pe(y | x(1))
is invariant within environments E ′ = {1, 2}. However, one can show that it is not the
case when we extend to E = {1, 2, 3}, as p3(y | x(1)) ̸= p1(y | x(1)). The corresponding
posterior distributions for the two scenarios are shown in Figure S1.

44

[0,0][1,0][0,1][1,1]0.00.51.0̂p(z|D)# of environments E = 2[0,0][1,0][0,1][1,1]# of environments E = 3feature selector zFigure S2: Synthetic study (Example 3): uncertainty quantification with p = 2 features.
For E = 2 (left), the posterior ˆp(z | D) is multi-modal over invariant selectors [1, 0] and
[1, 1]. With E = 3 (right), only [1, 0] remains invariant, and the posterior concentrates
at this value. All results are averaged over 1,000 simulations with 95% confidence bands.

Example 3. The joint distributions {pe(x, y)}3

e=1 are given by

p1(x, y) = p1(x(1))p(y | x(1))p1(x(2) | x(1))
p2(x, y) = p2(x(1))p(y | x(1))p2(x(2) | x(1))
p3(x, y) = p3(x(1))p(y | x(1))p3(x(2) | x(1), y)

where

p1(x(1)) = N (x(1) | 0, 0.12), p2(x(1)) = N (x(1) | 2, 0.12), p3(x(1)) = N (x(1) | 5, 0.12)
p(y | x(1)) = N (x(1) | x(1) + 0.5, 0.12)
p1(x(2) | x(1)) = N (x(2) | x(1) + 0.1, 0.12), p2(x(2) | x(1)) = N (x(2) | −2x(1) + 0.1, 0.12),
p3(x(2) | x(1), y) = N (x(2) | x(1) + y, 0.12).

The only set of invariant feature(s) across E = {1, 2, 3} is x(1), and the corresponding
invariant feature selector is z∗ = [1, 0].

In the first two environments E ′ = {1, 2}, x(1), x(2) are also invariant features:

p1(y | x(1), x(2)) = p(y | x(1))
p2(y | x(1), x(2)) = p(y | x(1))

since x(2) ⊥ y | x(1) under both p1(x, y) and p2(x, y). The corresponding posterior
distributions for the two scenarios are shown in Figure S2.

C.3 Comparison to other methods

For the experiments in § 4.3, we include details on data simulation, method implementa-
tion, and additional results in Supplementary Sections C.3.1 to C.3.3, respectively.

45

[0,0][1,0][0,1][1,1]0.00.51.0̂p(z|D)# of environments E = 2[0,0][1,0][0,1][1,1]# of environments E = 3feature selector zC.3.1 Simulation details

We follow the general data generative process described in the preamble of Supplementary
Section C with the following configuration (The reason to differentiate between various
p is to control the scale of parameter values to prevent the sampled x, y values from
exploding when p increases.):

1. When p = 10,

(a) pact ∼ Uniform ({0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9})

(b) For e = 1: (i) coefficient lower bound lb = 1; (ii) coefficient upper bound
ub = 2.1, (iii) noise level lower bound σmin = 0.1; (iv) noise level upper bound
σmax = 0.2.

(c) Separately for e = 2, · · · , E: for the intervened variable (i) mean of the abso-
lute value of the intercept me ∼ Uniform ([0, 1]); (ii) coefficient lower bound
lbe = (me + 0.01) ∗ 2; (iii) coefficient upper bound ube = (me + 0.5) ∗ 2;
(iv) variance multiplicative factor lower bound λe,min ∼ Uniform ([0.1, 0.2]);
(v) variance multiplicative factor relative range λe,diff ∼ Uniform ([0.1, 0.5]);
(vi)the probability of changing the coefficient pchange ∼ Uniform ([0.1, 0.3]);
and (vii) the fraction of features to be intervened on ρint
e ∼ Uniform ([0.5, 1])

2. When p = 450,

(a) pact ∼ Uniform ({0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25})

(b) For e = 1: same as p = 10 case

(c) Separately for e = 2, · · · , E: for the intervened variable (i) mean of the abso-
lute value of the intercept me ∼ Uniform ([0, 0.4]); (ii) coefficient lower bound
lbe = me + 0.01; (iii) coefficient upper bound ube = (me + 0.01) ∗ 1.5; other
simulation hyperparameters are chosen in the same way as p = 10 case

We set the maximum number of the true invariant features p∗
max = 5 when p = 10, and
p∗
max = 10 otherwise. For all cases of p we set the minimum number of the true invariant
features pmin = 1.

C.3.2 Method implementation details

1. EILLS: We follow the implementation at https://github.com/wmyw96/EILLS which

accompanies the original paper by Fan et al. [2023].

2. ICP: We use the implementation at https://github.com/juangamella/icp.

3. Hidden-ICP: We implement a PyTorch version of the original R package available
at https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/InvariantCausalPrediction/
index.html, which accompanies the original paper by Rothenh¨ausler et al. [2019].

46

Figure S3: Synthetic study with p = 10 features. Variational posterior at z∗ v.s. number
of environments E under different fraction of intervention features. Similar to Figure 3
(B), we observe that the variational posterior also concentrates at z∗ with increasing
number of environments, and the convergence is faster when the fraction of intervention
features is higher. The convergence of the variational posterior value at z∗ is slower than
that under the exact posterior shown in Figure 3 (B).

4. VI-BIP: The prior is uniform over {z ∈ {0, 1}p : ∥z∥0 ≤ pmax}. In low dimensions
(p = 10), pmax = 10 leading to an uninformative prior; In high dimensions (p = 450),
pmax = 20 encouraging sparsity.

We run VI-BIP with two initialization strategies for the variational parameters and
choose the one with better training-set ELBO. Consider each variational parameter
ϕi initialized as log σ0i
for i = 1, . . . , p. The two initializations are the following:
1−σ0i
(i) uninformative initialization: we set σ0i = min(pmax/p × 0.9, 0.4) for all i to
encourage sparsity without strong prior belief; and (ii) informative initialization:
based on the screening step described in the main text, we assign σ0i = 0.5 for the
10 screened indices and σ0i = 0.1 for the remaining ones.

As discussed in Supplementary Section B.3, when the sampled z is outside of prior
support, we set the corresponding objective value in Eq. 44 to −1. We always
compute analytical gradients of KL, and stochastic gradients of the likelihood com-
ponent in the ELBO.

In Algorithm 2, we use M = 20 gradient samples per iteration and optimize using
SGD. For learning rate scheduling, we employ a cyclical learning rate strategy with a
basic triangular cycle without amplitude scaling. Specifically, we set a base learning
rate of 1.0, a maximum learning rate of 10, and a cycle length of 1000 iterations,
with 500 steps in the increasing half. This scheduler can be implemented using the
PyTorch package [Paszke et al., 2019]:

torch.optim.lr scheduler.CyclicLR(optimizer, base lr=0.5, max lr=10,
step size up=500, mode=‘triangular’)

We run VI-BIP for a maximum of 2,000 iterations and select the variational pa-
rameters corresponding to the highest training-set ELBO.

47

05101520# of environments E0.00.51.0q(z*)Int. strength0.20.40.60.81.0C.3.3 Additional results

Figure S3 displays the variational posterior probability at the true z∗ by VI-BIP for the
p = 10 setting. Similar to the exact posterior results in Figure 3 (B), the variational
posterior concentrate around z∗ as the number of environments E increases, with faster
convergence at under stronger interventions (which induce greated heterogeneity across
environments). However, the convergence of the variational posterior probability at z∗ is
slower than that of the exact posterior shown in Figure 3 (B).

D Gene perturbation study

We include additional details for the experiments in § 5.

Evaluation details. We evaluate each method based on whether its predicted invariant
feature gene has a significant effect on the target gene. Specifically, we say the deletion of
gene j to have a significant effect on the target gene i, when (i) the deletion is successful,
i.e. the expression level of gene j is above the 99% quantile or below the 1% quantile of its
observational level, and (ii) the expression level of the target gene i changes significantly,
which is above the 99% quantile or below the 1% quantile of its observational level.

In Figure 5, each invariant inference method
Hyperparameter settings in Figure 5.
– EILLS-s, ICP-s, Hidden-ICP-s, BIP-s, and VI-BIP – is evaluated across multiple hy-
perparameter settings, represented by dots of varying sizes. Larger dots indicate more
conservative settings, where the method tends to predict fewer invariant feature genes.

• EILLS-s: Higher invariance regularizaiton parameter γ corresponds to more con-

servative behavior. We vary γ ∈ [1, 25, 50, 75, 100].

• ICP-s: Lower significance level α results in more conservative predictions. We vary

σ ∈ [0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1].

• Hidden-ICP: In contrast, higher α leads to more conservative behavior. We vary

σ ∈ [0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1].

• BIP-s and VI-BIP: Higher posterior thresholds t lead to more conservative results.

We vary t ∈ [0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9].

Implementation details. The implementations of EILLS, ICP, and Hidden-ICP follow
the same setup as described in Supplementary Section C.3.2.

For VI-BIP, we initialize the variational parameters ϕi to log σ0
1−σ0

for i = 1, · · · , p,
where the initial feature selection probability σ0 := 0.02. We choose the prior to be
uniform over {z ∈ {0, 1}p : ∥z∥0 ≤ pmax} with pmax = 200. These choices are determined
by coarsely searching over reasonable values guided by the optimization dynamics. A
good starting point is to ensure that pmax is smaller than the per-environment sample
size n so that the MLEs for local conditional models are well-defined. Additionally, it is

48

desirable that pσ0 < pmax so that the initial expected selected features is within the prior
support.

As discussed in Supplementary Section B.3, when the sampled z is outside of prior
support, we set the corresponding objective value in Eq. 44 to −1. With probability
of 0.5 we compute the analytical gradients of the KL regularization term in the ELBO;
otherwise we compute the stochastic gradients.

In Algorithm 2, we use M = 10 gradient samples per iteration and optimize using
SGD. For learning rate scheduling, we employ a cyclical learning rate strategy with a
basic triangular cycle that scales initial amplitude by half each cycle. Specifically, we set
a base learning rate of 0.5, a maximum learning rate of 10, and a cycle length of 1000
iterations, with 500 steps in the increasing half. This scheduler can be implemented using
the PyTorch package:

torch.optim.lr scheduler.CyclicLR(optimizer, base lr=0.5, max lr=10,
step size up=500, mode=‘triangular2’)

We run VI-BIP for a maximum of 10,000 iterations and select the variational param-

eters corresponding to the highest training-set ELBO.

49

