Causal Structure and Representation Learning
with Biomedical Applications∗
Caroline Uhler1,* and Jiaqi Zhang1,*
1Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology
*Emails: culer@mit.edu, viczhang@mit.edu
Abstract
Massive data collection holds the promise of a better understanding of complex phenomena and, ulti-
mately, better decisions. Representation learning has become a key driver of deep learning applications,
as it allows learning latent spaces that capture important properties of the data without requiring any
supervised annotations. Although representation learning has been hugely successful in predictive tasks, it
can fail miserably in causal tasks including predicting the effect of a perturbation/intervention. This calls
for a marriage between representation learning and causal inference. An exciting opportunity in this regard
stems from the growing availability of multi-modal data (observational and perturbational, imaging-based
and sequencing-based, at the single-cell level, tissue-level, and organism-level). We outline a statistical
and computational framework for causal structure and representation learning motivated by fundamental
biomedical questions: how to effectively use observational and perturbational data to perform causal dis-
covery on observed causal variables; how to use multi-modal views of the system to learn causal variables;
and how to design optimal perturbations.
1 Introduction.
Causality is concerned with understanding the underlying mechanisms that govern a system. It often centers
on fundamental questions such as: What is the underlying data-generating process that can explain observed
phenomena? What are the cause-effect relationships among the observed variables? How do the observed
variables change under specific interventions/perturbations? Andwhat are optimalinterventions/perturbations
in order to move the system to a desired state? Addressing such questions requires moving beyond correlations
and understanding causal mechanisms.
Examples:For illustration, consider the example of ice cream sales and sunburn incidences (fig. 1a). Al-
though there is a strong positive correlation between the two, one does not cause the other. Instead, a third
variable, sunny weather, is a common cause of both variables. This simple example illustrates the importance
of understanding causality, as misinterpretation could lead to ineffective interventions, such as banning ice
cream to prevent sunburns. Another example is fibrosis, which is responsible for up to 45% of deaths in the
industrialized world [75]. Fibrosis is associated with changes in many genes/proteins. However, only a subset
of genes/proteins are causal factors of fibrosis, while various other genes/proteins may be affected by tissue
stiffening and thus downstream of fibrosis (fig. 1b). Effective therapies require disentanglingupstream causal
genes/proteins, which represent potentialtherapeutic targets, fromdownstream biomarkersof the disease.
Causal DAG:A causal system is commonly represented by a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where each node
is associated with a random variable and each directed edge represents a direct causal relationship [32, 61, 43].
While extensions to cyclic models have been developed [52, 40, 30, 46], acyclicity has traditionally been assumed
since causality acts forward in time, and we here concentrate on DAGs. LetG= ([p], E)be a DAG with nodes
∗Forthcoming in the Proceedings of theInternational Congress of Mathematicians 2026, EMS Press. Both authors contributed
equally to this work.
1
arXiv:2511.04790v1  [cs.LG]  6 Nov 2025
ice cream 
sales
sunburn 
incidences 
weather
X2 X3
X1
(a) Ice cream sales and sunburn incidences.
causal
genes
tissue 
stiffening
fibrosis other
genes (b) Fibrosis and causal genes/proteins.
Figure 1: Illustrative examples and their respective causal graphs.
[p] :={1, . . . , p}and directed edgesE. Each nodeiinGis associated with a random variableXi and an edge
i→jinGindicates thatX i is a direct cause ofXj. TheMarkov propertyrelates the joint distribution of
X= (X 1, ..., Xp)⊤ toG, defined as follows.
Definition 1.A joint distributionPisMarkovwith respect to a DAGGif it factorizes according to
P(X1, . . . , Xp) =
pY
i=1
P(Xi |X PaG(i)),(1)
wherePa G(i) :={j∈[p] :i←j∈E}denotes the parents ofiinG.
This factorization implies a set of conditional independence (CI) relations. As a simple example, consider the
empty DAG on two nodes. A distribution is Markov to this DAG if it satisfiesP(X1, X2) =P(X 1)P(X2), which
implies thatX 1 is independent ofX 2, which we denote byX1 ⊥ ⊥X2. More generally, the Markov property
implies for every missing edge a collection of conditional independence relations associated to it which can be
read off from the DAG (viad-separationcriteria [44]); see Section 2.
Causal discovery:In many cases, the causal graphGis unknown, and only samples ofXfrom the joint
distribution on the nodes are available. The problem of inferring the underlying causal graph from data is
known ascausal discovery. By the Markov property, missing edges in the graph correspond to CI relations.
If the reverse also holds—an assumption known asfaithfulness[32, 61], which we will discuss in detail in
Section 2—then theadjacencies, i.e., presence or absence of edges in the DAG, can be inferred from data. In
the example in fig. 1a, we may observe in the data that ice cream sales (X2) is independent of the number of
sunburn incidences (X3) conditional on the weather (X1), and therefore infer that there is no edge betweenX2
andX 3 in the underlying causal graphG. However, note that while some edge directions can be inferred from
CI relations under the faithfulness condition (we will for example see in Section 2 that in the 3-node setting
X1 ⊥ ⊥X2 andX 1 ̸⊥ ⊥X2 |X 3 imply1→3←2), not all edge directions can be inferred. For example, in the
2-node setting with no CI relations, we cannot distinguish1→2from1←2. Thus, with observational data
alone, the underlying DAGGis only identifiable up to an equivalence class known as theMarkov equivalence
class(MEC) [69], denoted as[G]. It is possible to represent[G]with a partially directed graph, known as the
essential graphE(G)[3], which has the same adjacencies asGand a directed edgei→jinE(G)if and only if
it is directed in the same way in allG′ ∈[G]. We will discuss algorithms for causal discovery, i.e., for learning
the Markov equivalence class ofG, in Section 2.
Interventional data:In some settings, we may have access tointerventionaldata (also calledperturbational
data in biomedical applications), which can help in directing causal edges. An intervention is defined by a set
of target variablesI⊆[p]and a set of associatedmodified mechanismsP I(Xi |X PaG(i))fori∈Iresulting in
theinterventional distribution:
PI(X) =
Y
i̸∈I
P(Xi |X PaG(i))
Y
i∈I
PI(Xi |X PaG(i)).(2)
In general, an intervention can result in any modified mechanismPI(Xi |X PaG(i)). For example, adointerven-
tion sets its targeted variable to a specific value, i.e.,PI(Xi |X PaG(i)) =δ xi, whereδxi is the Dirac distribution
centered atx i [38]. Comparing the interventional distributionPI with the observational distributionPmay
enable identification of the underlying causal model beyond what is possible from observational data alone.
Returning to the example in fig. 1a, when we intervene on ice cream sales (X2), e.g., through promotions,
we observe that the weather (X1) remains unchanged (PI(X1) =P(X 1)); from this we can infer thatX2 is
2
not upstream ofX 1. Similarly, by intervening on sunburn incidences (X3), e.g., by applying sun screen, we
observe that the weather (X1) remains unchanged and thus thatX 3 is not upstream ofX 1, which allows
us to fully orient the causal graph. Unlike many other fields, biology benefits from modern techniques that
allow interventions to be applied at scale. Such interventions can take the form of genetic perturbations, e.g.,
using CRISPR-based methods [29], or chemical treatments, e.g., in small-molecule chemical screens [16]. A
genome-wide CRISPR screen can involve thousands of perturbations [18, 51, 26], providing the opportunity to
address a wide range of causal questions. In Sections 2 and 3, we will discuss how to use interventional data
for causal tasks.
Causal representation learning:In some settings, the causal variables may not be known, and we collect
data that do not directly measure the variables of primary interest. For example, we may take microscopy
images of cells; each pixel in the image is certainly not a causal variable, but the shape of the cell or the
amount and localization of a particular protein in the cell could be a causal variable (fig. 2b). From indirect
measurements we may still be able to identify the underlying causal variables and the rules governing their
interactions. Consider the setting in fig. 2a, where the observed variables, denoted asO, are generated by the
underlying causal variables, denoted asX. The goal ofcausal representation learning(CRL) is to recoverX
as well the causal relations between the variablesXand the mapping (also known as themixing function)
fromXtoO[56, 63]. A closely related problem, which can be formulated as a subproblem of CRL, is that of
causal feature learning(CFL), where the goal is to coarsen the observed variablesO, to obtain macrovariables
Xby partitioning the space of their realizations according to a downstream task [8]. It is worth noting that
recoveringXfromOis not always achievable, as some applications require finer grained measurements thanO,
making it impossible to invertOto obtainX. For example, relying solely on total cholesterol as measurement
inOcan obscure the causal relation with cardiovascular disease (fig. 2c). A more fine-grained distinction
between high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) is necessary, as reducing LDL has
been shown to causally lower disease risk, whereas decreasing HDL does not confer the same effect [62]. In
Section 3, we will discuss theory and methods for CRL. We note that the problem of CRL considered here
differs from the problem of causal discovery in the presence of latent variables, where the data directly measure
the causal variables (though not all of them) and the main focus is on recovering the causal relationships
between the observed causal variables, while in CRL the main focus is on discovering the causal variables from
related data. Extensive literature exists on causal discovery with latent variables [61, 60, 11, 42, 28, 64] which
we will not discuss in detail here.
𝑋1 𝑋2 𝑋𝑝…
𝑂1 𝑂2 𝑂𝑑…
(a) Graphical model representing
causal representation learning.
(b) Image of cells (from Human Pro-
tein Atlas).
cardiovascular 
disease
HDL
total 
cholesterol
LDL
lower
(c) Total cholesterol and cardiovas-
cular disease.
Figure 2: Illustrative examples of causal representation learning.
Making use of multi-modal data:In addition to interventional data, which are a form of multi-modal data,
we may also have multiple views or measurements of the system available, with each view providing information
on a subset of the causal variables. Figure 3 shows an example of a graphical model representing this scenario,
where three complementary viewsO1,O2,O3 generated by the underlying causal variablesX, are available.
The goal in this case is to learn the shared causal variables (e.g.,X1, X2, Xp), modality-specific causal variables
(e.g.,X 3, X4, X5, X6), and the causal relations between them. For example, clinicians leverage measurements
across complementary diagnostic modalities to develop an integrated understanding of the physiological state
of a patient. Figure 3b shows an example of two modalities, electrocardiograms (ECGs) containing myoelectric
information and cardiac magnetic resonance images (MRIs) containing structural information on the state of
the heart of an individual. Similarly, to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of the state of a cell,
biologists use sequencing-based assays to measure gene expression and high-resolution imaging to capture the
spatial localization of specific proteins (fig. 3c). In Section 3, we will discuss how such multi-modal data can
enhance the identification of causal variables and the causal relations among them.
3
𝑂2
𝑂1
𝑂2
𝑂1
𝑋1 𝑋2
𝑋𝑝
…
𝑋3
𝑋4 𝑋5
𝑋6
𝑂2
𝑂3𝑂1
(a) Graphical model representing
multi-modal causal representation
learning.
𝑂2
𝑂1
𝑂2
𝑂1
𝑋1 𝑋2
𝑋𝑝
…
𝑋3
𝑋4 𝑋5
𝑋6
𝑂2
𝑂3𝑂1
(b) Heart ECGs
and MRIs.
𝑂2
𝑂1
𝑂2
𝑂1
𝑋1 𝑋2
𝑋𝑝
…
𝑋3
𝑋4 𝑋5
𝑋6
𝑂2
𝑂3𝑂1
(c) Single-cell gene expression and
imaging data.
Figure 3: Illustrative examples of multi-modal causal representation learning.
Optimal design of interventions:Learning the underlying causal model and data-generating process not
only provides a fundamental understanding of the system, but also enables generalization and prediction of
a system’s behavior under novel conditions. This, in turn, offers a path for manipulating the system toward
a desired outcome. In the fibrosis example in fig. 1b, identifying disease-causal genes/proteins is critical for
the development of a therapy. More generally, although high-throughput perturbational experiments are now
feasible in the biomedical sciences [15, 18], the main challenge lies in the vast space of possible perturbations.
It is practically impossible to experimentally test the vast space of drug-like molecules (which is estimated
to be of size10 24 [6]) or to exhaustively perturb the combination of all 20,000 human genes. These huge
search spaces create a unique opportunity for computational approaches that can predict the effect of unseen
perturbations, allowing virtual screening of perturbations and identification of promising candidates without
the need for exhaustive experimental exploration. Such methods have the potential to accelerate therapeutic
discovery and inform strategies to modulate cellular states in a targeted manner. In Section 4, we will discuss
strategies for identifying optimal interventions/perturbations.
2 Causal discovery.
Consider a random vectorXwhose joint distributionPis Markov with respect to a DAGG(see Definition 1).
Causal discovery is concerned with the problem of inferringGgiven samples ofX. The Markov property implies
a collection of CI relations that can be fully characterized usingd-separation[44]; namely, two nodesi, jare
d-separatedinGby a setS⊆[p]\ {i, j}, denoted byi⊥ ⊥j|S, if all paths1 connectingiandjareblockedby
S. A path isblockedbySif it contains a nodeksatisfying one of the following conditions:
1.k /∈Sis acollideron the path, i.e., the adjacent nodesl, hon the path satisfyl→k←h, and all its
descendantsDes G(k) :={ℓ∈[p]| ∃a directed path fromktoℓinG}are not inS;
2.k∈Sis not a collider on the path.
Lemma 2.If a distributionPis Markov with respect to a DAGG, then d-separation implies conditional
independence, i.e.,i⊥ ⊥j|SinG=⇒X i ⊥ ⊥Xj |X S inP.
The proof of this lemma can be found in [69, 22]. Essentially, one can apply an inductive argument by first
considering three nodes and then extending it to additional nodes via the graphoid axioms [45]. While d-
separation implies conditional independence, the converse does not necessarily hold. The faithfulness condition
assumes this reverse implication, thereby allowing one to infer information aboutGfromP.
Definition 3.A joint distributionPisfaithfulto a DAGGif conditional independence implies d-separation,
i.e.,X i ⊥ ⊥Xj |X S inP=⇒i⊥ ⊥j|SinG.
1A path in a DAGGis a sequence of nodes such that any two consecutive nodes are adjacent inG.
4
In other words, the faithfulness assumption guarantees that two nodes that ared-connected(i.e., not d-
separated) inGcannot appear to be conditionally independent inP. Thus intuitively, the faithfulness assump-
tion precludes causal effects along different paths to cancel each other out. The Markov condition together with
the faithfulness assumption allow us to learn about the underlying DAGGas long as the correct CI relations
Xi ⊥ ⊥Xj |X S were inferred. In the finite-sample regime, the CI relations need to be estimated from the data
and thus a stronger form of faithfulness is needed. For example, in the multivariate Gaussian setting, Fisher’s
z-transform [19], i.e., a cutoff on the partial correlations depending on sample size, is used to obtain the CI
relations.
Definition 4.For fixedλ∈[0,1], a multivariate Gaussian distributionPisλ-strong faithfulto a DAGGif
for any nodesi, jinGand setS⊆[p]\ {i, j}with|corr(X i, Xj |X S)| ≤λit holds thati⊥ ⊥j|SinG.
Note that in the infinite-sample setting we can chooseλ= 0, which results in the standard faithfulness
assumption in Definition 3. Note also that the set of distributions violating faithfulness has Lebesgue measure
0[61], suggesting that faithfulness is a mild assumption. However, in the finite-sample regime whereλ >0the
set of distributions violatingλ-strong faithfulness no longer has measure0. In particular, [68] showed that the
measure ofλ-strong-unfaithful distributions can converge to1exponentially in the number of nodesp. This is
due to the curvature of the varieties corresponding to faithfulness violations and that thickening these varieties
can quickly become “space-filling”; we illustrate this via the following example on3variables.
Example 5.Consider a Gaussian distribution that satisfies the Markov property with respect to the fully-
connected DAGGwith edges1→2,1→3,2→3given by the following linear structural equations:
X1 =ϵ 1,
X2 =a 12X1 +ϵ 2,
X3 =a 13X1 +a 23X2 +ϵ 3,
whereϵ 1, ϵ2, ϵ3 are independent standard Gaussians. SinceGis fully connected, faithfulness requires all 6 partial
correlations,corr(X 1, X2),corr(X 1, X3),corr(X 2, X3),corr(X 1, X2 |X 3),corr(X 1, X3 |X 2),corr(X 2, X3 |X 1),
to be non-zero. Figure 4 shows the hypersurfaces of(a 12, a13, a23)⊤ inR 3 that correspond to faithfulness
violations. Sinceλ-strong faithfulness violations correspond to the by a factor ofλ“thickened” hypersurfaces,
it is apparent from the figure that even for small values ofλ, i.e., large sample sizes, the corresponding volume
is considerable.
(a)corr(X 1, X3) = 0.
 (b)corr(X 1, X2 |X 3) = 0.
 (c)corr(X 2, X3) = 0.
 (d) All 6 surfaces
Figure 4: Surfaces inR3 that correspond to unfaithful distributions for fully connected 3-node linear Gaussian
causal models.
This implies fundamental limitations for causal discovery algorithms that are based on testing many condi-
tional independence relations, since the true distribution needs to be bounded away from all hypersurfaces
corresponding to negative CI tests. This motivates the study of algorithms that either (1) rely less on CI
testing or (2) perform as few CI tests as possible. In the following, we review various causal discovery algo-
rithms. These are typically grouped into three categories:constraint-based,score-based, andhybridmethods.
Constraint-based methods infer the underlying graphGby performing CI tests and iteratively pruning DAGs
that violate these constraints. In contrast, score-based methods assign a score to each possible DAG, quan-
tifying its fit to the data, and then search for the DAG that maximizes this score. Hybrid methods combine
these ideas, for example by restricting the search space using CI relations and then optimizing a score within
this reduced space. For simplicity of the discussion below, we assume that the joint distributionPsatisfies the
Markov property and faithfulness assumption with respect toG, meaning that d-separation inGis equivalent
5
to CI relation inP, and that we have enough samples to fully determine all CI statements inP. It is worth
noting that many of the algorithms below do not require these assumptions to hold to be correct; see e.g. [66]
for a characterization of the correctness conditions of constraint-based methods.
2.1 The PC algorithm.
This pioneering causal discovery algorithm consists of two steps [61]: (1) starting from a fully connected
undirected graph, it iteratively removes edges between variables that are conditionally independent given some
conditioning set; and (2) it orients edges given the CI relations used in step (1). Step (1) fully identifies the
adjacencies inG. To see this, note that two nodesi, jare not adjacent inGif and only if they are d-separated by
some setS⊆[p]\{i, j}; for example,Scan be chosen to be the parents of nodei, i.e.,PaG(i) ={k∈[p]|k→i},
assuming without loss of generality that there is no directed edge fromitoj. Step (2) of the algorithm orients
some edges, first by identifying allv-structuresin the DAG, i.e., triplets of nodes(i, j, k)wherei, jare not
adjacent withi→kandj→k(fig. 5a), and then applying additional orientation rules known as Meek
rules [37]. Note that given the node adjacencies inferred in step (1) of the algorithm, the v-structures inGare
identifiable as triplets of nodes(i, j, k)wherei, jare not adjacent and for which there exists a setS⊆[p]\{i, j}
such thati⊥ ⊥j|Sandi̸⊥ ⊥j|S∪ {k}. The Meek rules, shown in fig. 5b, orient additional edges ensuring
the graph remains acyclic and no new v-structures are introduced. Importantly, the Meek rules are complete,
meaning that step (2) of the PC algorithm orients all edges that are identifiable, i.e., it outputs the essential
graph ofG[3].
𝑖
𝑘
𝑗
𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑙 𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑙 𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑙 𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑙
(a) V-structure.
𝑖
𝑘
𝑗 𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑙 𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑙 𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑙 𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑙 (b) Meek rules (1-4 from left to right and top to bottom).
Figure 5: V-structure and Meek rules.
2.2 The GAS algorithm.
Letddenote the maximum in-degree of the underlying causal DAGG. The PC algorithm at most requires
pΩ(d) number of CI tests [10], where the main bottleneck lies in the adjacency search, i.e., step (1). A large
number of CI tests not only exacerbates the computational burden but also, as reviewed at the beginning of
Section 2, requires strong faithfulness assumptions on the data generating distribution to be bounded away
from the hypersurfaces corresponding to negative CI tests. In recent work [39], we provided the following lower
bound on the number of CI tests required by any constraint-based causal discovery algorithm.
Theorem 6.Given observational data from a distribution that is Markov and faithful to a DAGG, any
algorithm requires at leastexp(Ω(s))CI tests to verifyG ∈[G], wheresis the size of the maximal undirected
clique2 in the essential graphE(G).
To show this, we proved that for any collection of fewer than2s −s−1CI tests, one can construct a very
similar but different MEC[G′]̸= [G]such that both classes are indistinguishable based on these CI relations [78].
Complementing Theorem 6, we also provided a causal discovery algorithm,greedy ancestral search(GAS), that
matches this lower bound [39].
2A clique is an induced subgraph in which all nodes are adjacent.
6
Theorem 7.Given observational data from a distribution that is Markov and faithful to a DAGGwithp
nodes, the GAS algorithm outputsE(G)using at mostp O(s) CI tests, wheresis the size of the maximum
undirected clique inE(G).
Note that since the most downstream node in the maximum undirected clique has an in-degree of at least
d−1, it holds thats≤d−1; thus the PC algorithm in general performs more CI tests than required. In the
following, we will discuss the key ideas of GAS, which build on our previous work [58], where we characterized
what can be learned about the Markov equivalence class[G]given only a polynomial number of CI tests. To
reduce the number of CI tests compared to the PC algorithm, GAS integrates steps (1) and (2); namely, the
algorithm focuses on using CI tests to learn ancestral relationships, which can then be used to perform CI
tests to uncover adjacencies in a more targeted way. To provide some intuition, note that if we were given all
ancestral relationships, i.e., a permutationπππ= (π 1, . . . , πp)of the nodes[p]that isconsistentwith the DAG
G= ([p], E)(i.e., if fori, j∈[p]there is a directed edgeπ i →π j ∈E, then it has to hold thati < j), then a
single CI test would be sufficient to determine the presence/absence of an edge:
(πi, πj)∈E⇐⇒X πi ̸⊥ ⊥Xπj |X S,whereS={π 1, π2, . . . , πj−1} \ {πi}.(3)
Thus, if we were given the correct ordering of the nodes, then a single CI test per edge would suffice. As a
consequence, the main difficulty of causal structure discovery is to learn the correct ordering/permutation of
the nodes and to identify CI tests that provide ancestral information. Towards this, we analyze the orientation
rules, i.e., step (2), in the PC algorithm and note that the ancestral relationships of a DAG are fully identified
by its v-structures and Meek rule 1. To see this, consider the four Meek rules in fig. 5b. In fig. 6 we indicate
the ancestral relationships in the graph before applying each Meek rule by partitioning the nodes into different
sets if they are connected by directed edges and grouping nodes that are only connected via undirected edges
into the most upstream partition they are connected to. It is apparent in fig. 6 that only Meek rule 1 provides
additional ancestral information beyond transitivity. Based on this insight, we developed two sets of CI tests
that allow us to identify the ancestral relationships given by v-structures and Meek rule 1 [39]. To describe
these, we use the notion ofdescendantsof a node defined above.
𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑙 𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑙 𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑙 𝑖
𝑗 𝑘
𝑙
Figure 6: Meek rules (1-4 from left to right and top to bottom) with ancestral partitions indicated in blue.
Lemma 8(CI test for v-structure).Consider a DAGGwith nodes[p]. For any three nodesi, j, k∈[p]and
setS⊆[p]\ {i, j, k}, ifXi ⊥ ⊥Xj |X S andX i ̸⊥ ⊥Xj |X S∪{k}, theni, j /∈DesG(k).
Lemma 9(CI test for Meek Rule 1).Consider a DAGGwith nodes[p]. LetS⊆[p]be a prefix set, i.e.,i∈S
then all its ancestors (i.e., all nodes with a directed path pointing toi) belong toS. For any three nodesi, j, k
such thati∈Sandj, k̸∈S, ifX i ̸⊥ ⊥Xk |X S\{i} andX i ⊥ ⊥Xk |X S∪{j}\{i}, thenj /∈DesG(k).
GAS iteratively expands the conditioning setSin these two lemmas to learn all ancestral relations. In partic-
ular, it maintains a sequence of prefix sets(Sℓ)ℓ=1,...,L, where starting inS0 =∅at each stepℓit obtainsS ℓ
fromS ℓ−1 by greedily adding elements according to these two lemmas. A detailed description of the algorithm
and the full proof of Theorem 7 can be found in [39].
2.3 The GSP algorithm.
Beyond constraint-based methods, score-based and hybrid methods assign a score to each possible DAG (or
MEC) based on its fit to the data, and might thus rely less heavily on CI tests. In the following, we describe
7
thegreedy sparsest permutation(GSP) algorithm [59], as a representative example of such causal discovery
methods. GSP is conceptually related to the GAS algorithm and preceded it.
A joint distributionPmay factorize with respect to multiple DAGs, not just the underlying DAGG; for
example, a distribution where all nodes are independent factorizes with respect to any DAG. Any such DAG
is called anindependence map(I-MAP) ofP. In fact, in Section 2.2 we have already seen how to obtain all
minimal I-MAPs, i.e., I-MAPs ofPwhere the removal of any edge would result in a new DAG that is no
longer an I-MAP ofP[69]. Namely, for any permutationπππof the nodes, define the DAGG πππ = ([p], Eπππ)by
property (3). Note that minimal I-MAPs of a DAGGmay have different number of edges. For a simple
example, consider the 3-node DAGGwith edges1→3,2→3. Then the minimal I-MAPs with respect to the
permutations1<2<3and2<1<3are equal toGand thus have two edges, while the minimial I-MAPs
with respect to all other permutations are fully connected. We proved that under the Markov and faithfulness
assumptions the sparsest I-MAP must be Markov equivalent toG[49]:
Theorem 10.Given a joint distributionPthat is Markov and faithful with respect to a DAGG, any I-MAP
G′ ofPsuch thatG ′ ̸∈[G](if it exists) must contain strictly more adjacencies thanG.
This result directly suggests thesparsest permutation(SP) algorithm [49]: enumerate all permutationsπ ππ,
obtain the corresponding minimal I-MAPGπππ using CI tests inP, then use the number of edges as a score
function to return the sparsest DAG. However, this procedure is clearly computationally prohibitive, as the
number of possible permutations isp!.
The greedy sparsest permutation (GSP) algorithm mitigates this by greedily searching over the space of per-
mutations [59]: At each stepi, GSP maintains a permutationπππi and its corresponding minimal I-MAPGπππi.
It then searches over all DAGs in the Markov equivalence class[Gπππi]for some DAGG ′ that is not a minimal
I-MAP ofP. This search can be executed by repeatedly flippingcovered3 edges, as guaranteed by the con-
struction of a Chickering sequence [9] based on Meek’s conjecture [37]. SinceG′ is not a minimal I-MAP ofP
(it is an I-MAP sinceG′ ∈[G πππi]), there must exist edges that can be removed to obtainG′′ which is a minimal
I-MAP ofP. GSP then takes the permutation consistent withG′′ as the new permutationπππi+1, withG ′′ as its
corresponding minimal I-MAP. We showed that GSP is guaranteed to return the correct MEC; a more detailed
description of the algorithm and the proof of Theorem 11 can be found in [59].
Theorem 11.Given observational data from a distribution that is Markov and faithful to a DAGG, the GSP
algorithm outputs the essential graphE(G).
Building on GSP, [31] introduced a family of causal discovery algorithms called GRaSP, which employ a novel
traversal strategy in the space of DAGs, referred to as “tuck”. They showed that the lowest tier of GRaSP
is equivalent to GSP, while higher tiers require weaker faithfulness assumptions for correctness. In fact, [66]
showed that the correctness condition required by SP is among the weakest of all causal discovery algorithms.
However, since SP requires enumerating all permutations, it incurs substantial computational cost. This
suggests an important trade-off between correctness condition and computational efficiency that remains to be
better understood.
2.4 Interventional data.
Without additional assumptions [46], from observational data alone it is only possible to identify the MEC of
the underlying causal graph. As motivated in Section 1, interventional data may improve the identifiability
of the underlying causal DAG. However, similar to the observational setting, a faithfulness assumption is
required to ensure that the effects of interventions do not de-generate and can be used for causal discovery.
[67] introduced the following interventional faithfulness assumption based on the marginal distribution of the
targeted variables.
Definition 12.Given a joint distributionPthat is Markov and faithful with respect to a DAGG. An
interventionIdefined by the modified mechanismsP I(Xi |X PaG(i))fori∈Isatisfies theinterventional
faithfulness conditionif the interventional distributionPI(X)defined in Equation (2) satisfiesPI(Xj)̸=P(X j)
for all nodesj∈ ∪i∈IDesG(i).
3An edgei→jin a DAGGiscoveredif the parents ofjare exactly the parents ofiplusiitself, i.e.,Pa G(j) =Pa G(i)∪ {i}.
8
It follows directly from the definition of the interventional distribution in Equation (2) thatPI(Xj) =P(X j)
for all nodesj̸∈ ∪ i∈IDesG(i). Therefore, interventional faithfulness guarantees that we can identify nodes
that are downstream of an intervention. Algorithms building upon this intuition can identify additional edge
orientations in[G][24]. In particular, we used this idea to extend GSP to the interventional setting [70, 72]
and we also considered the problem of learning from interventional data without performing any CI tests [36].
2.5 Application to learning gene regulatory networks.
A concrete application of these algorithms arises in the inference of gene regulatory networks. Here, the
variablesXcorrespond to the expression levels of individual genes, and the causal graphGspecifies the
regulatory relationships between them. For example, a transcription factorX i regulates another geneX j
(denotedi→jinG) by binding to the cis-regulatory element of that gene on the DNA. With current single-
cell RNA-seq technologies, each data point corresponds to the gene expression measurement of a single cell
across all genes [4]. Such single-cell measurements can be coupled with CRISPR-based techniques [29] to
perturb individual genes through knock-out, repression, or activation. This technology, known as Perturb-
seq [15], allows simultaneous measurement of the expression of all genes as well as the perturbation that was
performed on the cell, providing large-scale perturbational datasets.
In [59], we analyzed the first Perturb-seq dataset on bone-marrow–derived dendritic cells [15]; in particular, we
applied PC and GSP to the992observational samples, and we used the13,534interventional samples across8
gene deletions for evaluating the output of these algorithms. In the analysis, we restricted the dimensionality to
p= 24, focusing on transcription factors known to regulate a variety of genes, including one another [20]. More
recently, in [39] we applied GAS, which is significantly faster due to the small number of CI tests performed,
to single-cell gene expression data generated by the SERGIO simulator [14]. This allowed us to compare the
inferred structures directly against the ground-truth DAG. The experiments involved2,700cells with expression
profiles onp= 100genes. In [70, 72], we extended GSP to the interventional setting, and applied it to [15].
Beyond gene expression data, in [70, 72], we also applied the interventional versions of GSP to study a protein
signaling network based on a mass spectrometry dataset consisting of5,846measurements of phosphoprotein
and phospholipid levels in primary human immune cells [54]; interventions in this setting correspond to chemical
reagents that inhibit or activate specific signaling proteins. Furthermore, in [5], we proposed a method to
directly learn differences in gene regulatory mechanisms across conditions, and we applied this approach to two
single-cell gene expression datasets containing perturbational data for validation [13, 15].
3 Going beyond observed causal variables through causal represen-
tation learning.
In Section 2, we considered the setting where the causal variablesX= (X1, . . . , Xp)⊤ of interest are directly
observed. In many cases, however, we only have data on variablesO= (O1, . . . , Od)⊤ that do not directly
measureX, as discussed in Section 1. In this section, we describe approaches to learnXfromO. In particular,
we will consider three different settings. In Section 3.1, we consider the single-modality setting, where we
have access to samples fromO=f(X), with latent causal variablesXdrawn from a distributionPthat is
Markov with respect to a causal DAGG, andfan unknown mixing function. In Section 3.2, we consider
the interventional setting, where we have access to samples fromOI =f(X I)forKdifferent interventions
I∈ {I1, . . . , IK}(note thatI=∅reduces to the previous setting), whereX I is drawn from the interventional
distributionP I, which is obtained from a distributionPthat is Markov with respect to a causal DAGG, andf
is an unknown mixing function that remains fixed across interventions. Finally, in Section 3.3, we consider the
setting withMpartially overlapping modalities,O 1 =f 1(X), . . . ,OM =f M (X), where the causal variablesX
are drawn from a distributionPthat is Markov with respect to a causal DAGG, andf1, . . . ,fM are unknown
modality-specific mixing functions. Note that this includes the case whereOi is a function of just a subset of
the latent variablesX.
In each subsection below, we will consider the problem ofidentifiability, namely whether it is possible to recover
the underlying causal variablesXand their relationshipsG, as well as algorithms to do so. For simplicity, we
will assume throughout access to sufficient samples fromO,O I,I∈ {I 1, . . . , IK}andO 1, . . . ,OM to fully
determine their distributions. Note that in general, we cannot achieve full identifiability. For example, there
9
is a trivial non-identifiability corresponding to renaming variables: if we simultaneously permute the entries
ofXand the functionfaccording to the same permutationπ ππ= (π 1, . . . , πp), we obtain the same observed
variables:f(X) =f πππ(Xπππ),X πππ = (X π1 , . . . , Xπp)⊤ are the permuted variables and the permuted mixing
functionf πππ corresponds to permuting the input–output mapping off. Similarly, one can apply element-wise
affine transformations to bothXandfwithout changingO. Thus, at most we can identify the underlying
causal model up to anequivalence class.
3.1 Causal representation learning from single-modality data.
The identifiability problem is difficult as it encompasses both disentanglement (to identifyX) and causal
discovery (to identifyG). Traditionally, in the disentanglement literature, the latent factors are assumed to be
independent, and it is known that identifying them is not possible without additional assumptions on the data-
generatingprocess[27]. WeareinterestedinthemoregeneralsettingwherethelatentcausalvariablesXmaybe
related and we aim to discover not onlyXbut also their relationshipsG. Since the traditional disentanglement
problem is a special case,Xis unidentifiable without additional assumptions. In the following, we describe
an approach that utilizes asymmetries inPto learnX[71]. Towards this, we consider the following three
assumptions:
Assumption 13.The mixing functionfis linear and invertible, i.e., there is a full-column rank matrix
F∈R d×p such thatO=FX.
Assumption 14.The factors of the joint distributionPofXare specified by
Xi =h i(XPaG(i)) +ϵ i,∀i∈[p],
where eachhi is a twice continuously differentiable, non-linear function that captures the dependence ofXi on
its parents, and eachϵi ∼ N(0, σ2
i )corresponds to an exogenous noise variable that is mutually independent
and mean-zero Gaussian.
Assumption 15.For anyi∈[p]and any non-zero vectorβ∈R |PaG(i)|, the random variable∂2
β,β hi(XPaG(i))
is not always zero.
Assumption 13 constrains the space of possible mixing functionsf. We note that we do not assume prior
knowledge of the dimensionpof the latent causal variables. Sincefis linear and invertible,pcan be identified
from the intrinsic dimension of the joint distribution ofO. Note also that we can assume without loss of
generality that the linear mapping is zero-centered, since as discussed at the beginning of Section 3 that we
will at best be able to identifyXup to element-wise affine transformations. The nonlinear causal model with
additive Gaussian noise in Assumption 14 has been a popular choice in the causal discovery literature due to
its flexibility, identifiability properties (in the fully observed setting), and benign statistical sample complexity
requirements [47, 55, 53, 82]. Assumption 15 functions similarly to the faithfulness assumption, ensuring that
the causal effect of a parent on a child is non-degenerated. The class of nonlinear causal models with additive
Gaussian noise implies an asymmetric relationship between causes and effects, which can be utilized to infer
causal relations and fully identify the underlying causal model in the setting where all causal variables are
observed [53]. The following lemma summarizes the key property. Its proof can be found in [53].
Lemma 16.LetJ(x)denote the Jacobian matrix ofXatxwithij-th entry given byJ(x) ij =∇ xi∇xj logP(x).
Thei-th diagonal element of the Jacobian matrix has zero variance, i.e.,var(J(X)ii) = 0, if and only if node
iis aleaf nodeinG, i.e.,Des G(i) =∅.
Although we are unable to obtainJ(X)sinceXis not directly measured, a similar result holds despite the
unknown mixing functionF: LetJ O(o)denote the Jacobian matrix ofOato, defined analogously toJ(x).
LetF † = (F⊤F)−1F⊤ denote the Moore-Penrose inverse. SinceJ(F†o) =F ⊤JO(o)F, then by Lemma 16 it is
possible to infer leaf-node information fromF⊤JO(o)F. We showed in [71] that if we solve forFby maximizing
the number of zero diagonal entries invar(F⊤JO(O)F), we obtain exactly the number of leaf nodes inG. More
precisely, we showed the following result.
Lemma 17.Let the matrix ˆFbe obtained by solving
min
F∈Rd×p
var

diag
 
F⊤JO(O)F

0
,
such that rank(F) =p.
(4)
10
Denoting byJ ˆX the Jacobian matrix ofˆX, then it follows thatˆX= ˆF†Osatisfies
ˆXi =
(
linear(Xnon−leaf )ifvar(J ˆX( ˆX)ii)̸= 0,
linear(X)ifvar(J ˆX( ˆX)ii) = 0,
where the number of nodesi∈[p]such thatvar(J ˆX( ˆX)ii) = 0equals to the number of leaf nodes inG.
We note that all Jacobians in Lemma 17 can be computed based on the observed samples fromO. In addition,
we do not need to knowpapriori, since the constrained optimization problem in eq. (4) can be interpreted
as solving for a full-column rank matrix such that thel0 norm is maximized. We showed in [71] that this
optimization problem can be equivalently formulated as a quadratically constrained quadratic program and
efficiently solved by off-the-shelf numerical solvers [35]. In summary, Lemma 17 provides an approach for
iteratively identifying leaf nodes as a linear combination of all variables in its own and upstream layers. This
leads to the following identifiability “up to upstream layers”, wherelayer(k)is defined as the set of all nodes
whose longest path to a leaf node is of lengthk.
Theorem 18.Under Assumptions 13, 14, and 15, given sufficient samples ofOthe latent causal variablesX
are identifiable up to their upstream layers, i.e., we can learnˆXfromOsuch that:
ˆX=P πππCX,
whereP πππ ∈R p×p is a permutation matrix, andC∈R p×p is a constant matrix with non-zero diagonal entries
andC ij = 0for alli, jsuch thati∈layer(k)andj∈ ∪ l≤klayer(l).
The full proof of Theorem 18 and a detailed description of the algorithm can be found in [71].
3.2 Causal representation learning from interventional data.
We next consider the setting where we have access to interventional data. Like for causal discovery, this will
result in stronger identifiability results. We here consider the setting where each intervention{I1, . . . , IK}has
a unique targetiamong the causal variablesX, but the target variable is unknown sinceXis unknown. In
addition, we assume that for every causal variable, there is at least one intervention that targets it. Moreover,
we make the following two assumptions.
Assumption 19.The interior of the support ofPis a non-empty subset ofR p. The mixing functionfis a
full-column rank polynomial, i.e., there exists some integers, a full-column rank matrixF∈Rd×(p+···+ps) such
thatO=F( ¯⊗X, ¯⊗X2, . . . ,¯⊗Xs)⊤, where ¯⊗Xr denotes the size-pr row-vector with degree-rpolynomials ofX
as its entries.
Assumption 20.Linear interventional faithfulnessholds for all interventionsI∈ {I 1, . . . , IK}; i.e., leti
denote the target ofIand letCh G(i) ={j∈[p]|i∈Pa G(j)}denote the children ofiinG. Then for every
j∈ {i} ∪ChG(i)such thatPa G(j)∩Des G(i) =∅, it holds thatP(X j +C ⊤XS)̸=P I(Xj +C ⊤XS)for any
constant vectorC∈R |S|, whereS= [p]\({j} ∪Des G(i)).
Assumption 19 allows us to extend linear mixing in Assumption 13 to polynomial mixing: the support with non-
empty interior guarantees that we can identify the dimensionpofX, and the full-rank polynomial assumption
ensures that we can search forf(and consequentlyX) in a constrained subspace [2]. We do not need to
impose any parametric constraints as in Assumption 14, since interventions allow us to exploit the principle
of invariance rather than asymmetries in the observational distribution to identify the causal relations [7].
However, to apply the principle of invariance, we must assume that interventions induce changes in the system.
Assumption 20 extends the interventional faithfulness assumption in Definition 12 from the causal discovery
setting with observed causal variables to the setting where we only observe a linear mixing of the causal
variables. In this setting, a stronger condition is needed to ensure that the effect of intervening on a causal
variableX i not only affects its children, but that the effect will not be canceled out through linear combinations
with other causal variables that are not downstream ofXi. Note that this condition only needs to hold fori
itself and the most upstream child ofi, which may be much smaller than the set of all children ofi.
11
Under these assumptions, we can show that we can identify the causal variables and their relationships by
detecting marginal changes made by interventions. To provide some intuition, consider the easier setting
whereK=p, i.e., we have exactly one intervention per latent causal variable. Based on the intuition provided
in the previous paragraph, we can reduce the polynomial mixing to a linear mixing fromRp toR p. Thus we
consider the case where we have access toO∈R p, which is a linear transformation ofX. Note that for a
source nodeiofG,P(X i)̸=P I(Xi)if and only if the target ofIisi. By enforcing that the learned ˆXis of
the form ˆXi =C ⊤Oand that it satisfiesP( ˆXi)̸=P I( ˆXi)for exactly oneI∈ {I1, . . . , Ip}, then Assumption 20
guarantees that ˆXi can only be an affine transformation of a source node and that the particular intervention
Icorresponds to intervening on this source node. The argument is as follows: (1) IfCj ̸= 0for a non-source
nodej, then letjbe the most downstream node withC j ̸= 0, in which caseP( ˆXi)̸=P I( ˆXi)for at least two
interventions targetingjand its most downstream parents inPaG(j), which is a contradiction; (2) IfCi1 ̸= 0
andC i2 ̸= 0for two source nodesi 1, i2, thenP( ˆXi)̸=P I( ˆXi)for two interventions targetingi1 andi 2, which
is a contradiction. In general, we can apply this argument to identify all interventions inI1, ..., IK that target
source nodes ofG. Then using an iterative argument, we can identify all interventions that target source
nodes of the subgraph ofGafter removing its source nodes. This procedure results in the ancestral relations
between the targets ofI1, ..., IK. This argument holds more generally even when causal variables are targeted
by multiple interventions. Denoting byAncG(j) :={i∈[p]|j∈Des G(i)}the set ofancestorsof a nodejin
Gand byT S(G)itstransitive closure, i.e.,i→j∈ T S(G)if and only ifi∈Anc G(j), we showed the following
result [77].
Theorem 21.Under Assumptions 19 and 20, given sufficient samples fromO,O I1 , . . . ,OIK the transitive
closureT S(G)and the targets of the interventionsI 1, . . . , IK are identifiable up to a permutationπππof the
variables[p]. If in addition for every edgei→j∈ G, for any constantsc,(d)k∈S ∈Rthere is
Xi ̸⊥ ⊥Xj +cX i |(X PaG(j)\(S∪{i}) ,{X k +d kXi}k∈S),
whereS=Pa G(j)∩Des G(i), then the full causal graphGis identifiable up to a permutationπππof the variables
[p].
In general, we cannot identify beyond the transitive closure ofG, since the effect of a direct edge may be
explained by the transitive effects of multiple edges. DAGs with the same transitive closure can span a
spectrum of sparsities; for example, a complete graph and a line graph with the same topological ordering
have the same transitive closure. The additional assumption in the theorem can be seen as an additional
interventional faithfulness condition and guarantees identifiability ofG(up to a permutation of the nodes).
While in this case we can associate each latent causal variable with the interventions that target it (i.e., we
can interpret the causal latent variables) and we can fully identify the causal structure among the latent causal
variables, identification up to a permutation means that we cannot identifyXin an element-wise fashion.
Application to learning gene regulatory networks.We next discuss the implications of our identifia-
bility results in the context of large-scale Perturb-seq screens [41]. Given infinite high-dimensional single-cell
transcriptomic readouts from a whole-genome Perturb-seq screenO,O I1 , . . . ,OIK , Theorem 21 guarantees
that we can identify the interventions that act on the same latent node, the ancestral relationships among the
intervention targets, and—under the additional assumption in the theorem—the exact causal structure. This
means that we can identify the number of latent causal variables (which we can interpret as the gene programs
of a cell), which genes belong to the same program, as well as the full regulatory relationships between the
programs.
In[77], weturnedthesetheoreticalresultsintoapracticalautoencodingvariationalBayesframeworktoestimate
the latent causal representation from interventional data using maximum mean discrepancy. By applying our
computational framework to a Perturb-seq study [41], we tested its ability to identify gene programs and
regulatory networks between programs, as well as on the task of predicting the effect of unseen combinatorial
interventions. The Perturb-seq dataset [41] contains 8,907 unperturbed cells (i.e., samples fromO) and 99,590
perturbed cells that underwent CRISPR activation [23] targeting one or two out of 105 genes (samples from
OI1 ,...,O IK withK= 217). In [33], we extended this framework to be able to incorporate prior knowledge
on the gene regulatory network and applied it to a subset of a Perturb-seq experiment on K562 cells with279
perturbations and more than200cells per perturbation [51].
12
3.3 Causal representation learning from partially overlapping multi-modal data.
While the interventional setting considered in Section 3.2 can be seen as multi-modal, with each intervention be-
ing a modality that provides a distinct view on the full causal system, we now consider the general multi-modal
setting where each modality inO1, . . . ,OM , withOm ∈R dm form∈[M], is not necessarily interventional and
may provide information only on a subset of the causal variables. In this case, we haveMdifferent mixing
functionsf 1, . . . ,fM , one for each modality. LetX L withL ⊆[p]denote the set of latent causal variables
that are shared across theMmodalities, and we denote byXLm,m∈[M]the modality-specific latent causal
variables, i.e.,L1 ∪···∪L M = [p]\L. We assume that the modality-specific latent causal variables are disjoint,
i.e.,L i ∩ Lj =∅ifi̸=j. Moreover, we make the following three assumptions.
Assumption 22.The mixing functionsf 1, . . . ,fM are linear and invertible, i.e., for each modalitym∈[M]
there is a full-column rank matrixFm ∈R dm×(|L|+|Lm|) such thatO m =F m(X⊤
L,X⊤
Lm)⊤.
Assumption 23.The factors of the joint distributionPofXare specified by
Xi =A ⊤
i XPaG(i) +ϵ i,
whereA i ∈R |PaG(i)| and the exogenous noise variablesϵi,i∈[p]are mutually independent, zero-mean, unit
variance, non-degenrate, non-symmetric and pairwise different to each other and to the flipped versions, i.e.,
they satisfyϵ i
d
=ϵ j orϵ i
d
=−ϵ j if and only ifi=j.
Assumption 24.The underlying causal DAGGsatisfies the following conditions: there is no edge betweenL
andL m for anym∈[M]and there is no edge betweenL i andL j for anyi̸=j.
Similarly to the assumptions in Section 3.1 and 3.2, Assumption 22 ensures that we can identify the dimension
pofXand search for the mixing functions (and consequentlyX) in a constrained subspace. Assumption 23
allows us to extend the identifiability results of linear ICA [12, 17] to our multi-modal setup to identify the joint
distribution. In particular, the assumption of pairwise different error distributions allows for “matching” the
distributions across modalities to identify the ones corresponding to the shared latent space. Non-symmetry
accounts for the sign-indeterminacy of linear ICA when matching the distributions. Assumption 24 implies that
the shared causal variables do not depend on modality-specific ones, and that modality-specific causal variables
from one modality do not depend on modality-specific causal variables from other modalities, although causal
relations between modality-specific variables of the same modality are allowed. Under these assumptions, we
showed the following result, namely that one can recover the distribution of the exogenous noise variables and
the mapping from these variables to the observed variables up to a permutation, as well as identify the set of
exogenous noise variables corresponding to the shared causal variablesXL.
Theorem 25.LetI p denote the identity matrix of dimensionp. LetO∈R d1+···+dM denote the random
vector obtained by stackingO1, . . . ,OM , and similarly, letF∈R (d1+···+dM)×p denote the matrix obtained by
stackingF 1, . . . ,FM such thatO=FX, where the variables inXare ordered as(L,L 1, . . . ,LM ). Under
Assumptions 22, 23, and 24, given sufficient samples fromO1, . . . ,OM we can identify the number of shared
latent causal variables|L|and we can writeO= ˆBˆϵϵϵ, where we can identify the matrixˆBand joint distribution
ˆϵϵϵ∼ ˆPas follows:
ˆB=F(I p −A) −1Pπππ, ˆP=P πππ,
whereP πππ ∈R p×p is a permutation matrix andPπππ is the joint distribution ofϵπ1 , . . . , ϵπP .
With the following additional assumptions we can obtain identifiability results on the structure of the shared
causal graph (among the latent causal variables that are shared across modalities).
Assumption 26.For each shared latent nodeℓ∈ L, there exist two distinct observed variablesO∗
i ,O∗
j (can
belong to any of theMmodalities) that depend only onXℓ.
Assumption 27.For any two subsetsD⊆[d 1 +···+d M ]andL⊆ Land any matrices ˜A∈R p×p and
˜F∈R (d1+···+dM)×p that have the same sparsity pattern asAandF, it holds that rank((F(Ip −A) −1)D,L)≥
rank((˜F(Ip − ˜A)−1)D,L).
Assumption 26 is a sparsity condition on the concatenated mixing matrixF; Assumption 27 guarantees that
no configuration of edge parameters coincidentally yields low rank. Under these additional assumptions, we
showed the following identifiability result in [65].
13
Theorem 28.Under Assumptions 22, 23, 24, 26, and 27, from sufficient samplesO 1, . . . ,OM the shared
causal variablesX L and the shared causal graphG L (defined by the submatrixA L) are identifiable up to
permutation and scaling, i.e., we can identify
ˆXL =P πππCXL, ˆAL =P πππCALC−1P−1
πππ ,
whereP πππ ∈R |L|×|L| is a permutation matrix, andC∈R |L|×|L| is an invertible diagonal matrix.
Application to multi-modal integration, translation, and disentanglement of biomedical data.
We next discuss the implications of our identifiability results in the context of biomedical data together with
practical algorithms for learningXfromO. We first consider the setting where all latent causal variablesXL
are shared across modalities, i.e.,L= [p]. We developed various practical approaches based on autoencoders,
where modality-specific encoders and decoders are used to map between observed data from each modality
Om, m∈[M], and the shared latent spaceXL [73, 74, 48, 80]. When paired data is avaialble across modalities,
i.e., wehaveaccesstodatafromthejointdistribution(O 1, . . . ,OM ), aconstrastivelosscanbeusedinthelatent
space to align the different modalities. In [48], we applied this approach to construct a holistic representation
of cardiovascular state based on two modalities,O1 being heart ECG data andO2 being heart MRI data.
However, in many biomedical applications obtaining a measurement is destructive to the system and thus
paired measurements are not available. For example, it is only possible to measure a cell via sequencing or
imaging modality, but not both. In [73], when different (unpaired) modalities are generated from a shared
latent representation, we proved that the problem of computing a probabilistic couplingXL between marginals
of different modalitiesO1, . . . ,OM is equivalent to learning multiple uncoupled autoencoders that embed to
a given shared latent distribution. In [74], we applied this framework to integrate single-cell RNA-seq and
chromatin imaging data, which cannot be measured in the same cell, to identify distinct subpopulations of
human naïve CD4+ T cells poised for activation [81].The advantage of using autoencoder architectures is their
generative nature, which allows analyzing a related task, namely whether and how well one modality could
be translated to another, in particular if one modality is cheaper and/or easier to obtain. Our work also
suggested for the first time that cheap chromatin imaging may contain sufficient information to translate to
more expensive and laborious RNA-seq measurements at single-cell resolution.
In order to obtain the most complete picture of a causal system, it is critical to be able to integrate data
of different modalities and understand what information is not shared between modalities. Our identifiability
results for partially overlapping multi-modal data suggested that we could go beyond a fully shared latent space
and identify information that is modality-specific. In [80], we proposed a computational framework that auto-
matically learns partial information sharing across modalities via an autoencoder with a partially overlapping
latent space (for two modalities this latent space corresponds to(XL,XL1 ,XL2 )). We applied this method to
paired scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq data (SHARE-seq) [34], paired scRNA-seq and surface protein data (CITE-
seq) [21], and large-scale multiplexed single-cell imaging datasets, such as the Human Protein Atlas [50]. In
addition to multi-modal data integration and translation, this work provides the first computational framework
in the biomedical domain for disentangling information that is shared between different data modalities from
information that can only be obtained from a specific modality, a task that is critical for experimental design
and the selection of modalities.
4 Causal experimental design.
We next consider the problem of experimental design in causal systems, where data is collected in an active
fashion over multiple rounds either from the observational distribution, from different interventions, or other
modalities. This is a relatively nascent area, and we consider two settings: the problem of optimal design of
interventions, where in each round we can decide which interventions to perform, and the more general problem
of optimal design of modalities, where in each round we can decide from which modality to collect data. By
adaptively designing experiments taking the current dataset into account, it should be possible to achieve a
desired goal more efficiently, with less amount of data, as compared to a passive design.
Optimal design of interventions.Figure 7 illustrates the process of experimental design of interventions:
The learned perturbation prediction model is iteratively updated overTrounds with the newly collected
data. In round 1, a random subset of interventions is selected for which experiments are performed. These
14
Figure 7: Illustration of iterative intervention design.
experiments, together with data from the observational distribution, are used as warm-up to obtain a predictive
model of intervention effectsg1 :I→P I. In roundt+ 1, letI t denote the interventions performed so far and
letg t denote the current model. The interventionsIt+1 \ It for the next batch of experiments are chosen so
as to maximize anacquisition functiona t :I→R, which ranks all possible interventions. The problem of
optimal design of interventions is relevant for the setting where all causal variables are observed considered in
Section 2 as well as the causal representation learning setting considered in Section 3.
The predictive modelgt is chosen depending on the application of interest. For example, in [1] we adopted a
Bayesian approach, in which a structural causal modelGis learned to model the effect of an intervention, with
Gsampled from the Bayesian posterior over all possible DAGs given the current data; in [76], we used a linear
additive Gaussian causal model on the observed causal models together with shift interventions; and in [25]
we used discrepancy-based variational autoencoders instead. Similarly, the acquisition functionat is tailored
to the goal of the experiments. For example, in [1], we considered the problem of learning a function of the
underlying causal graph (e.g., the set of descendants of a target node) subject to design constraints such as
limits on the number of samples and rounds of experimentation, and we used mutual information between this
function and the collected samples as the acquisition function. In [76], we considered the problem of achieving a
desired target mean for the interventional distribution, and we used output-weighted variance as the acquisition
function. We applied this framework to a semi-synthetic experiment to learn genetic interventions that achieve
a target mean. In [79], we considered the same goal but assumed that one can gather infinite data per
intervention and used a structure-based acquisition function. We extended this work in [57] to consider several
goals including learning the orientation of edges of a specific set. Finally, in [25], we considered the goal of
learning a generalizable functiong:I→P I for all possible interventionsIand experimented with multiple
types of uncertainty-based acquistion functions. We applied this framework to the genome-wide Perturb-seq
data on K562 cells [51] and estimated the number of interventions needed to learn a generalizable intervention
effect model.
Optimal design of modalities.Technological developments in the past decades have led to an explosion
of data of different modalities in the biomedical sciences. Different modalities come with different cost and
information. For example, heart ECG data is much more prevalent and cost-effective than heart MRI data,
but in unlike MRI data, ECG data is believed to contain only limited structural information. In future
work, it will be critical to build on the methods for learning and disentangling shared and modality-specific
information discussed in Section 3.3 to develop principled approaches to decide which modality to prioritize
given a particular downstream task.
There is an extensive literature on experimental design, spanning areas such as Bayesian optimization, bandits,
reinforcement learning, and uncertainty quantification. However, it is not well understood how to incorporate
causal information so that experimental design guides data collection in a way that both benefits and con-
tributes to accelerating the discovery of the underlying causal mechanisms. This is a nascent area with many
open problems that are of great relevance for the biomedical sciences, where experiments are often performed
iteratively and an important end goal is to obtain causal/mechanistic understanding.
Acknowledgments.
This review forms the basis for an Invited Section Lecture at the International Congress of Mathematicians
2026. We thank all former and current members of the Uhler Lab as well as our collaborators for the many
fruitful discussions that have collectively shaped our outlook and made this work possible.
15
References
[1] Raj Agrawal, Chandler Squires, Karren Yang, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, and Caroline Uhler. ABCD-
strategy: Budgeted experimental design for targeted causal structure discovery. InThe 22nd International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 3400–3409. PMLR, 2019.
[2] Kartik Ahuja, Divyat Mahajan, Yixin Wang, and Yoshua Bengio. Interventional causal representation
learning. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages 372–407. PMLR, 2023.
[3] Steen A Andersson, David Madigan, and Michael D Perlman. A characterization of markov equivalence
classes for acyclic digraphs.The Annals of Statistics, 25(2):505–541, 1997.
[4] Alev Baysoy, Zhiliang Bai, Rahul Satija, and Rong Fan. The technological landscape and applications of
single-cell multi-omics.Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 24(10):695–713, 2023.
[5] Anastasiya Belyaeva, Chandler Squires, and Caroline Uhler. DCI: learning causal differences between gene
regulatory networks.Bioinformatics, 37(18):3067–3069, 2021.
[6] Regine S Bohacek, Colin McMartin, and Wayne C Guida. The art and practice of structure-based drug
design: a molecular modeling perspective.Medicinal Research Reviews, 16(1):3–50, 1996.
[7] Peter Bühlmann. Invariance, causality and robustness.Statistical Science, 35(3):404–426, 2020.
[8] Krzysztof Chalupka, Frederick Eberhardt, and Pietro Perona. Causal feature learning: an overview.
Behaviormetrika, 44(1):137–164, 2017.
[9] David Maxwell Chickering. Optimal structure identification with greedy search.Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 3(Nov):507–554, 2002.
[10] Tom Claassen, Joris Mooij, and Tom Heskes. Learning sparse causal models is not np-hard.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1309.6824, 2013.
[11] Diego Colombo, Marloes H Maathuis, et al. Order-independent constraint-based causal structure learning.
Journal Machine Learning Research, 15(1):3741–3782, 2014.
[12] Pierre Comon. Independent component analysis, a new concept?Signal Processing, 36(3):287–314, 1994.
[13] Paul Datlinger, André F Rendeiro, Christian Schmidl, Thomas Krausgruber, Peter Traxler, Johanna
Klughammer, Linda C Schuster, Amelie Kuchler, Donat Alpar, and Christoph Bock. Pooled CRISPR
screening with single-cell transcriptome readout.Nature Methods, 14(3):297–301, 2017.
[14] PayamDibaeiniaandSaurabhSinha. SERGIO:asingle-cellexpressionsimulatorguidedbygeneregulatory
networks.Cell Systems, 11(3):252–271, 2020.
[15] Atray Dixit, Oren Parnas, Biyu Li, Jenny Chen, Charles P Fulco, Livnat Jerby-Arnon, Nemanja D Mar-
janovic, Danielle Dionne, Tyler Burks, Raktima Raychowdhury, et al. Perturb-seq: dissecting molecular
circuits with scalable single-cell rna profiling of pooled genetic screens.Cell, 167(7):1853–1866, 2016.
[16] Ulrike S Eggert and Timothy J Mitchison. Small molecule screening by imaging.Current Opinion in
Chemical Biology, 10(3):232–237, 2006.
[17] Jan Eriksson and Visa Koivunen. Identifiability, separability, and uniqueness of linear ica models.IEEE
Signal Processing Letters, 11(7):601–604, 2004.
[18] David Feldman, Avtar Singh, Jonathan L Schmid-Burgk, Rebecca J Carlson, Anja Mezger, Anthony J
Garrity, Feng Zhang, and Paul C Blainey. Optical pooled screens in human cells.Cell, 179(3):787–799,
2019.
[19] Ronald Aylmer Fisher. The distribution of the partial correlation coefficient.Metron, 3:329–332, 1924.
[20] Manuel Garber, Nir Yosef, Alon Goren, Raktima Raychowdhury, Anne Thielke, Mitchell Guttman, James
Robinson, Brian Minie, Nicolas Chevrier, Zohar Itzhaki, et al. A high-throughput chromatin immunopre-
cipitation approach reveals principles of dynamic gene regulation in mammals.Molecular Cell, 47(5):810–
822, 2012.
16
[21] Adam Gayoso, Zoë Steier, Romain Lopez, Jeffrey Regier, Kristopher L Nazor, Aaron Streets, and Nir
Yosef. Joint probabilistic modeling of single-cell multi-omic data with totalvi.Nature methods, 18(3):272–
282, 2021.
[22] Dan Geiger, Thomas Verma, and Judea Pearl. Identifying independence in Bayesian networks.Networks,
20(5):507–534, 1990.
[23] Luke A Gilbert, Max A Horlbeck, Britt Adamson, Jacqueline E Villalta, Yuwen Chen, Evan H Whitehead,
Carla Guimaraes, Barbara Panning, Hidde L Ploegh, Michael C Bassik, et al. Genome-scale CRISPR-
mediated control of gene repression and activation.Cell, 159(3):647–661, 2014.
[24] Alain Hauser and Peter Bühlmann. Characterization and greedy learning of interventional markov equiv-
alence classes of directed acyclic graphs.Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1):2409–2464, 2012.
[25] Chujun He, Jiaqi Zhang, Munther Dahleh, and Caroline Uhler. Morph predicts the single-cell outcome of
genetic perturbations across conditions and data modalities.bioRxiv, pages 2025–06, 2025.
[26] Ann C Huang, Tsung-Han S Hsieh, Jiang Zhu, Jackson Michuda, Ashton Teng, Soohong Kim, Elizabeth M
Rumsey, Sharon K Lam, Ikenna Anigbogu, Philip Wright, et al. X-Atlas/Orion: genome-wide perturb-seq
datasets via a scalable fix-cryopreserve platform for training dose-dependent biological foundation models.
bioRxiv, pages 2025–06, 2025.
[27] Aapo Hyvärinen and Petteri Pajunen. Nonlinear independent component analysis: Existence and unique-
ness results.Neural Networks, 12(3):429–439, 1999.
[28] Fattaneh Jabbari, Joseph Ramsey, Peter Spirtes, and Gregory Cooper. Discovery of causal models that
contain latent variables through Bayesian scoring of independence constraints. InJoint European confer-
ence on machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases, pages 142–157. Springer, 2017.
[29] Gavin J Knott and Jennifer A Doudna. CRISPR-Cas guides the future of genetic engineering.Science,
361(6405):866–869, 2018.
[30] Gustavo Lacerda, Peter L Spirtes, Joseph Ramsey, and Patrik O Hoyer. Discovering cyclic causal models
by independent components analysis.arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.3273, 2012.
[31] Wai-Yin Lam, Bryan Andrews, and Joseph Ramsey. Greedy relaxations of the sparsest permutation
algorithm. InUncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 1052–1062. PMLR, 2022.
[32] Steffen L Lauritzen.Graphical models, volume 17. Clarendon Press, 1996.
[33] Emily Liu, Jiaqi Zhang, and Caroline Uhler. Learning genetic perturbation effects with variational causal
inference.bioRxiv, pages 2025–06, 2025.
[34] Sai Ma, Bing Zhang, Lindsay M LaFave, Andrew S Earl, Zachary Chiang, Yan Hu, Jiarui Ding, Alison
Brack, Vinay K Kartha, Tristan Tay, et al. Chromatin potential identified by shared single-cell profiling
of rna and chromatin.Cell, 183(4):1103–1116, 2020.
[35] Hugues Marchand, Alexander Martin, Robert Weismantel, and Laurence Wolsey. Cutting planes in integer
and mixed integer programming.Discrete Applied Mathematics, 123(1-3):397–446, 2002.
[36] Bijan Mazaheri, Jiaqi Zhang, and Caroline Uhler. Faithfulness and intervention-only causal discovery. In
ICML 2025 Workshop on Scaling Up Intervention Models, 2025.
[37] Christopher Meek. Causal inference and causal explanation with background knowledge.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1302.4972, 2013.
[38] Nicolai Meinshausen, Alain Hauser, Joris M Mooij, Jonas Peters, Philip Versteeg, and Peter Bühlmann.
Methods for causal inference from gene perturbation experiments and validation.Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 113(27):7361–7368, 2016.
[39] Marc Franquesa Monés, Jiaqi Zhang, and Caroline Uhler. On the number of conditional indepdence tests
in constraint-based causal discovery.arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01823, 2024.
17
[40] Joris M Mooij, Dominik Janzing, Tom Heskes, and Bernhard Schölkopf. On causal discovery with cyclic
additive noise models.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 24, 2011.
[41] Thomas M Norman, Max A Horlbeck, Joseph M Replogle, Alex Y Ge, Albert Xu, Marco Jost, Luke A
Gilbert, and Jonathan S Weissman. Exploring genetic interaction manifolds constructed from rich single-
cell phenotypes.Science, 365(6455):786–793, 2019.
[42] Juan Miguel Ogarrio, Peter Spirtes, and Joe Ramsey. A hybrid causal search algorithm for latent variable
models. InConference on Probabilistic Graphical Models, pages 368–379. PMLR, 2016.
[43] Judea Pearl.Causality. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[44] Judea Pearl.Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference. Elsevier, 2014.
[45] Judea Pearl and Azaria Paz. Graphoids: Graph-based logic for reasoning about relevance relations or
when would x tell you more about y if you already know z? InProbabilistic and Causal Inference: The
Works of Judea Pearl, pages 189–200. 2022.
[46] Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf.Elements of causal inference: foundations and
learning algorithms. The MIT press, 2017.
[47] Jonas Peters, Joris Mooij, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Identifiability of causal graphs using
functional models.arXiv preprint arXiv:1202.3757, 2012.
[48] Adityanarayanan Radhakrishnan, Sam F Friedman, Shaan Khurshid, Kenney Ng, Puneet Batra, Steven A
Lubitz, Anthony A Philippakis, and Caroline Uhler. Cross-modal autoencoder framework learns holistic
representations of cardiovascular state.Nature Communications, 14(1):2436, 2023.
[49] Garvesh Raskutti and Caroline Uhler. Learning directed acyclic graph models based on sparsest permu-
tations.Stat, 7(1):e183, 2018.
[50] Aviv Regev, Sarah A Teichmann, Eric S Lander, Ido Amit, Christophe Benoist, Ewan Birney, Bernd
Bodenmiller, Peter Campbell, Piero Carninci, Menna Clatworthy, et al. The human cell atlas.elife,
6:e27041, 2017.
[51] Joseph M Replogle, Reuben A Saunders, Angela N Pogson, Jeffrey A Hussmann, Alexander Lenail,
Alina Guna, Lauren Mascibroda, Eric J Wagner, Karen Adelman, Gila Lithwick-Yanai, et al. Mapping
information-rich genotype-phenotype landscapes with genome-scale perturb-seq.Cell, 185(14):2559–2575,
2022.
[52] Thomas S Richardson. A discovery algorithm for directed cyclic graphs.arXiv preprint arXiv:1302.3599,
2013.
[53] Paul Rolland, Volkan Cevher, Matthäus Kleindessner, Chris Russell, Dominik Janzing, Bernhard
Schölkopf, and Francesco Locatello. Score matching enables causal discovery of nonlinear additive noise
models. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages 18741–18753. PMLR, 2022.
[54] Karen Sachs, Omar Perez, Dana Pe’er, Douglas A Lauffenburger, and Garry P Nolan. Causal protein-
signaling networks derived from multiparameter single-cell data.Science, 308(5721):523–529, 2005.
[55] Bernhard Schölkopf, Dominik Janzing, Jonas Peters, Eleni Sgouritsa, Kun Zhang, and Joris Mooij. On
causal and anticausal learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6471, 2012.
[56] Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner, Anirudh
Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward causal representation learning.Proceedings of the IEEE, 109(5):612–
634, 2021.
[57] Kirankumar Shiragur, Jiaqi Zhang, and Caroline Uhler. Meek separators and their applications in targeted
causal discovery.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:48744–48767, 2023.
[58] Kirankumar Shiragur, Jiaqi Zhang, and Caroline Uhler. Causal discovery with fewer conditional indepen-
dence tests.arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01823, 2024.
18
[59] Liam Solus, Yuhao Wang, and Caroline Uhler. Consistency guarantees for greedy permutation-based
causal inference algorithms.Biometrika, 108(4):795–814, 2021.
[60] Peter Spirtes. An anytime algorithm for causal inference. InInternational Workshop on Artificial Intelli-
gence and Statistics, pages 278–285. PMLR, 2001.
[61] Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, and Richard Scheines.Causation, Prediction, and Search. MIT press,
2000.
[62] Peter Spirtes and Richard Scheines. Causal inference of ambiguous manipulations.Philosophy of Science,
71(5):833–845, 2004.
[63] Chandler Squires, Anna Seigal, Salil S Bhate, and Caroline Uhler. Linear causal disentanglement via
interventions. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages 32540–32560. PMLR, 2023.
[64] Chandler Squires, Yuhao Wang, and Caroline Uhler. Permutation-based causal structure learning with
unknown intervention targets. InConference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 1039–1048.
PMLR, 2020.
[65] Nils Sturma, Chandler Squires, Mathias Drton, and Caroline Uhler. Unpaired multi-domain causal repre-
sentation learning.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:34465–34492, 2023.
[66] Kai Z Teh, Kayvan Sadeghi, and Terry Soo. A general framework for constraint-based causal learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07575, 2024.
[67] Jin Tian and Judea Pearl. Causal discovery from changes.arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.2312, 2013.
[68] Caroline Uhler, Garvesh Raskutti, Peter Bühlmann, and Bin Yu. Geometry of the faithfulness assumption
in causal inference.The Annals of Statistics, pages 436–463, 2013.
[69] Thomas Verma and Judea Pearl. Causal networks: Semantics and expressiveness. InMachine Intelligence
and Pattern Recognition, volume 9, pages 69–76. Elsevier, 1990.
[70] Yuhao Wang, Liam Solus, Karren Yang, and Caroline Uhler. Permutation-based causal inference algo-
rithms with interventions.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
[71] Ryan Welch, Jiaqi Zhang, and Caroline Uhler. Identifiability guarantees for causal disentanglement from
purely observational data.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:102796–102821, 2024.
[72] Karren Yang, Abigail Katcoff, and Caroline Uhler. Characterizing and learning equivalence classes of
causal dags under interventions. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5541–5550.
PMLR, 2018.
[73] Karren D Yang and Caroline Uhler. Multi-domain translation by learning uncoupled autoencoders. 2019.
[74] Karren Dai Yang, Anastasiya Belyaeva, Saradha Venkatachalapathy, Karthik Damodaran, Abigail Kat-
coff, Adityanarayanan Radhakrishnan, GV Shivashankar, and Caroline Uhler. Multi-domain translation
between single-cell imaging and sequencing data using autoencoders.Nature Communications, 12(1):31,
2021.
[75] Fereshteh Sadat Younesi, Andrew E Miller, Thomas H Barker, Fabio MV Rossi, and Boris Hinz. Fibroblast
and myofibroblast activation in normal tissue repair and fibrosis.Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology,
25(8):617–638, 2024.
[76] Jiaqi Zhang, Louis Cammarata, Chandler Squires, Themistoklis P Sapsis, and Caroline Uhler. Active
learning for optimal intervention design in causal models.Nature Machine Intelligence, 5(10):1066–1075,
2023.
[77] Jiaqi Zhang, Kristjan Greenewald, Chandler Squires, Akash Srivastava, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, and
Caroline Uhler. Identifiability guarantees for causal disentanglement from soft interventions.Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:50254–50292, 2023.
19
[78] Jiaqi Zhang, Kirankumar Shiragur, and Caroline Uhler. Membership testing in markov equivalence classes
via independence queries. InInternational Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 3925–
3933. PMLR, 2024.
[79] Jiaqi Zhang, Chandler Squires, and Caroline Uhler. Matching a desired causal state via shift interventions.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:19923–19934, 2021.
[80] Xinyi Zhang, GV Shivashankar, and Caroline Uhler. Partially shared multi-modal embedding learns
holistic representation of cell state.bioRxiv, pages 2024–10, 2024.
[81] Grace XY Zheng, Jessica M Terry, Phillip Belgrader, Paul Ryvkin, Zachary W Bent, Ryan Wilson,
Solongo B Ziraldo, Tobias D Wheeler, Geoff P McDermott, Junjie Zhu, et al. Massively parallel digital
transcriptional profiling of single cells.Nature Communications, 8(1):14049, 2017.
[82] Zhenyu Zhu, Francesco Locatello, and Volkan Cevher. Sample complexity bounds for score-matching:
Causal discovery and generative modeling.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:3325–
3337, 2023.
20
