Learning to Optimize Via Information-Directed Sampling
Daniel Russo1 and Benjamin Van Roy2
1Northwestern University, daniel.russo@kellogg.northwestern.edu
2Stanford University, bvr@stanford.edu
July 10, 2017
Abstract
We proposeinformation-directed sampling– a new approach to online optimization problems
in which a decision-maker must balance between exploration and exploitation while learning
from partial feedback. Each action is sampled in a manner that minimizes the ratio between
squaredexpectedsingle-periodregretandameasureofinformationgain: themutualinformation
between the optimal action and the next observation.
We establish an expected regret bound for information-directed sampling that applies across
a very general class of models and scales with the entropy of the optimal action distribution.
We illustrate through simple analytic examples how information-directed sampling accounts for
kinds of information that alternative approaches do not adequately address and that this can
lead to dramatic performance gains. For the widely studied Bernoulli, Gaussian, and linear
bandit problems, we demonstrate state-of-the-art simulation performance.
1 Introduction
In the classical multi-armed bandit problem, a decision-maker repeatedly chooses from among a
ﬁnite set of actions. Each action generates a random reward drawn independently from a proba-
bility distribution associated with the action. The decision-maker is uncertain about these reward
distributions, but learns about them as rewards are observed. Strong performance requires striking
a balance betweenexploring poorly understood actions andexploiting previously acquired knowl-
edge to attain high rewards. Because selecting one action generates no information pertinent to
other actions, eﬀective algorithms must sample every action many times.
There has been signiﬁcant interest in addressing problems with more complexinformation struc-
tures, in which sampling one action can inform the decision-maker’s assessment of other actions.
Eﬀective algorithms must take advantage of the information structure to learn more eﬃciently.
The most popular approaches to such problems extendupper-conﬁdence-bound(UCB) algorithms
and Thompson sampling, which were originally devised for the classical multi-armed bandit prob-
lem. In some cases, such as the linear bandit problem, strong performance guarantees have been
established for these approaches. For some problem classes, compelling empirical results have also
been presented for UCB algorithms and Thompson sampling, as well as the knowledge gradient
algorithm. However, as we will demonstrate through simple analytic examples, these approaches
can perform very poorly when faced with more complex information structures. Shortcomings stem
from the fact that they do not adequately account for particular kinds of information.
In this paper, we propose a new approach – information-directed sampling (IDS) – that is
designed to address this. IDS quantiﬁes the amount learned by selecting an action through an
1
arXiv:1403.5556v7  [cs.LG]  7 Jul 2017
information-theoretic measure: the mutual information between the true optimal action and the
next observation. Each action is sampled in a manner that minimizes the ratio between squared
expected single-period regret and this measure of information gain. Through this information
measure, IDS accounts for kinds of information that alternatives fail to address.
As we will demonstrate through simple analytic examples, IDS can dramatically outperform
UCB algorithms, Thompson sampling, and the knowledge-gradient algorithm. Further, by leverag-
ing the tools of our recent information theoretic analysis of Thompson sampling [61], we establish
an expected regret bound for IDS that applies across a very general class of models and scales with
the entropy of the optimal action distribution. We also specialize this bound to several classes
of online optimization problems, including problems with full feedback, linear optimization prob-
lems with bandit feedback, and combinatorial problems with semi-bandit feedback, in each case
establishing that bounds are order optimal up to a poly-logarithmic factor.
We benchmark the performance of IDS through simulations of the widely studied Bernoulli,
Gaussian, and linear bandit problems, for which UCB algorithms and Thompson sampling are
known to be very eﬀective. We ﬁnd that even in these settings, IDS outperforms UCB algorithms
and Thompson sampling. This is particularly surprising for Bernoulli bandit problems, where UCB
algorithms and Thompson sampling are known to be asymptotically optimal in the sense proposed
by Lai and Robbins [49].
IDS solves a single-period optimization problem as a proxy to an intractable multi-period prob-
lem. Solution of this single-period problem can itself be computationally demanding, especially
in cases where the number of actions is enormous or mutual information is diﬃcult to evaluate.
We develop numerical methods for particular classes of online optimization problems. In some
cases, our numerical methods do not compute exact or near-exact solutions but generate eﬃcient
approximations that are intended to capture key beneﬁts of IDS. There is much more work to be
done to design eﬃcient algorithms for various problem classes and we hope that our analysis and
initial collection of numerical methods will provide a foundation for further developments.
It is worth noting that the problem formulation we work with, which is presented in Section
3, is very general, encompassing not only problems with bandit feedback, but also a broad array
of information structures for which observations can oﬀer information about rewards of arbitrary
subsets of actions or factors that inﬂuence these rewards. Because IDS and our analysis accommo-
date this level of generality, they can be specialized to problems that in the past have been studied
individually, such as those involving pricing and assortment optimization (see, e.g., [14, 57, 65]),
though in each case, developing a computationally eﬃcient version of IDS may require innovation.
2 Literature review
UCB algorithms are the primary approach considered in the segment of the stochastic multi-armed
bandit literature that treats problems with dependent arms. UCB algorithms have been applied
to problems where the mapping from action to expected reward is a linear [1, 24, 56], generalized
linear [25], or sparse linear [2] model; is sampled from a Gaussian process [67] or has small norm
in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space [67, 69]; or is a smooth (e.g. Lipschitz continuous) model
[17, 45, 68]. Recently, an algorithm known as Thompson sampling has received a great deal of
interest. Agrawal and Goyal [6] provided the ﬁrst analysis for linear contextual bandit problems.
Russo and Van Roy [58, 59] consider a more general class of models, and show that standard
analysis of upper conﬁdence bound algorithms leads to bounds on the expected regret of Thompson
sampling. Very recent work of Gopalan et al. [33] provides asymptotic frequentist bounds on the
growth rate of regret for problems with dependent arms. Both UCB algorithms and Thompson
2
sampling have been applied to other types of problems, like reinforcement learning [40, 53] and
Monte Carlo tree search [10, 46].
In one of the ﬁrst papers on multi-armed bandit problems with dependent arms, Agrawal et al.
[3] consider a general model in which the reward distribution associated with each action depends
on a common unknown parameter. When the parameter space is ﬁnite, they provide a lower bound
on the asymptotic growth rate of the regret of any admissible policy as the time horizon tends to
inﬁnity and show that this bound is attainable. These results were later extended by Agrawal et al.
[4] and Graves and Lai [34] to apply to the adaptive control of Markov chains and to problems with
inﬁnite parameter spaces. These papers provide results of fundemental importance, but seem to
have been overlooked by much of the recent literature.
Though the use of mutual information to guide sampling has been the subject of much research,
dating back to the work of Lindley [50], to our knowledge, only two other papers [36, 70] have used
the mutual information between the optimal action and the next observation to guide action selec-
tion. Each focuses on optimization of expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions. Here,black–box
indicates the absence of strong structural assumptions such as convexity and that the algorithm
only has access to function evaluations, whileexpensive-to-evaluateindicates that the cost of evalu-
ation warrants investing considerable eﬀort to determine where to evaluate. These papers focus on
settings with low-dimensional continuous action spaces, and with a Gaussian process prior over the
objective function, reﬂecting the belief that “smoother” objective functions are more plausible than
others. This approach is often called “Bayesian optimization” in the machine learning community
[13]. Both Villemonteix et al. [70] and Hennig and Schuler [36] propose selecting each sample to
maximize the mutual information between the next observation and the optimal solution. Several
papers [37, 38, 39] have extended this line of work since an initial version of our paper appeared
online. The numerical routines in these papers use approximations to mutual information, and may
give insight into how to design eﬃcient computational approximations to IDS.
Several features distinguish our work from that of Villemonteix et al. [70] and Hennig and
Schuler [36]. First, these papers focus on pure exploration problems: the objective is simply to learn
about the optimal solution – not to attain high cumulative reward. Second, and more importantly,
they focus only on problems with Gaussian process priors and continuous action spaces. For
such problems, simpler approaches like UCB algorithms [67], probability of improvement [47], and
expected improvement [51] are already extremely eﬀective. As noted by Brochu et al. [13], each
of these algorithms simply chooses points with “potentially high values of the objective function:
whether because the prediction is high, the uncertainty is great, or both.” By contrast, a major
motivation of our work is that a richer information measure is needed to address problems with more
complicated information structures. Finally, we provide a variety of general theoretical guarantees
for information-directed sampling, whereas Villemonteix et al. [70] and Hennig and Schuler [36]
propose their algorithms as heuristics without guarantees. Section 9.1 shows that our theoretical
guarantees extend to pure exploration problems.
The knowledge gradient (KG) algorithm uses a diﬀerent measure of information to guide action
selection: the algorithm computes the impact of a single observation on the quality of the decision
made by agreedyalgorithm, which simply selects the action with highest posterior expected reward.
This measure was proposed by Mockus et al. [51] and studied further by Frazier et al. [29] and
Ryzhov et al. [64]. KG seems natural since it explicitly seeks information that improves decision
quality. Computational studies suggest that for problems with Gaussian priors, Gaussian rewards,
and relatively short time horizons, KG performs very well. However, there are no general guarantees
for KG, and even in some simple settings, it may not converge to optimality. In fact, it may select
a suboptimal action inevery period, even as the time horizon tends to inﬁnity. IDS also measures
the information provided by a single observation, but our results imply it converges to optimality.
3
KG is discussed further in Subsection 4.3.3.
Our work also connects to a much larger literature on Bayesian experimental design (see [20] for
a review). Contal et al. [22] study problems with Gaussian process priors and a method that guides
exploration using the mutual information between the objective function and the next observation.
This work provides a regret bound, though, as the authors’ erratum indicates, the proof of the
regret bound is incorrect. Recent work has demonstrated the eﬀectiveness ofgreedy or myopic
policies that always maximize a measure of the information gain from the next sample. Jedynak
et al. [41] and Waeber et al. [71] consider problem settings in which this greedy policy is optimal.
Another recent line of work [31, 32] shows that measures of information gain sometimes satisfy
a decreasing returns property known as adaptive sub-modularity, implying the greedy policy is
competitive with the optimal policy. Our algorithm also only considers the information gain due
to thenext sample, even though the goal is to acquire information over many periods. Our results
establish that the manner in which IDS encourages information gain leads to an eﬀective algorithm,
even for the diﬀerent objective of maximizing cumulative reward.
Finally, our work connects to the literature on partial monitoring. First introduced by [54]
the partial monitoring problem encompasses a broad range of online optimization problems with
limited or partial feedback. Recent work [11] has focused on classifying the minimax-optimal scaling
of regret in the problem’s time horizon as a function of the level of feedback the agent receives.
That work focuses most attention on cases where the agent receives very restrictive feedback, and
in particular, cannot observe the reward their action generates. Our work also allows the agent to
observe rich forms of feedback in response to actions they select, but we focus on a more standard
decision-theoretic framework in which the agent associates their observations with a reward as
speciﬁed by a utility function.
The literature we have discussed primarily focuses on contexts where the goal is to converge on
an optimal action in a manner that limits exploration costs. Such methods are not geared towards
problems where time preference plays an important role. A notable exception is the KG algorithm,
which takes a discount factor as input to account for time preference. Francetich and Kreps [26, 27]
discuss a variety of heuristics for the discounted problem. Recent work [62] generalizes Thompson
sampling to address discounted problems. We believe that IDS can also be extended to treat
discounted problems, though we do not pursue that in this paper.
The regret bounds we will present build on our information-theoretic analysis of Thompson
sampling [61], which can be used to bound the regret of any policy in terms of its information
ratio. The information ratio of IDS is always smaller than that of TS, and therefore, bounds on
the information ratio of TS provided in Russo and Van Roy [61] yield regret bounds for IDS. This
observation and a preliminary version of our results was ﬁrst presented in a conference paper [60].
Recent work by Bubeck et al. [18] and Bubeck and Eldan [16] build on ideas from [61] in another
direction by bounding the information ratio when the reward function is convex and using that
bound to study the order of regret in adversarial bandit convex optimization.
3 Problem formulation
We consider a general probabilistic, or Bayesian, formulation in which uncertain quantities are
modeled as random variables. The decision-maker sequentially chooses actions(At)t∈N from a ﬁnite
action set Aand observes the corresponding outcomes (Yt,At)t∈N. There is a random outcome
Yt,a ∈Y associated with each actiona ∈A and time t ∈N. Let Yt ≡(Yt,a)a∈A be the vector of
outcomes at timet ∈N. There is a random variableθsuch that, conditioned onθ, (Yt)t∈N is an
iid sequence. This can be thought of as a Bayesian formulation, where randomness inθcaptures
4
the decision-maker’s prior uncertainty about the true nature of the system, and the remaining
randomness inYt captures idiosyncratic randomness in observed outcomes.
The agent associates a reward R(y) with each outcome y ∈ Y, where the reward function
R : Y→ R is ﬁxed and known. LetRt,a = R(Yt,a) denote the realized reward of actiona at time
t. Uncertainty about θ induces uncertainty about the true optimal action, which we denote by
A∗∈arg max
a∈A
E[R1,a|θ]. The T–period regretof the sequence of actionsA1,..,AT is the random
variable
Regret(T) :=
T
t=1
(Rt,A∗−Rt,At) , (1)
which measures the cumulative diﬀerence between the reward earned by an algorithm that always
chooses the optimal action and actual accumulated reward up to timeT. In this paper we study
expected regret
E[Regret(T)] = E
) T
t=1
(Rt,A∗−Rt,At)
[
, (2)
where the expectation is taken over the randomness in the actionsAt and the outcomesYt, and
over the prior distribution overθ. This measure of performance is commonly calledBayesian regret
or Bayes risk.
The actionAt is chosen based on the history of observationsFt = (A1,Y1,A1 ,...,At−1,Yt−1,At−1 )
up to timet. Formally, arandomized policyπ = (πt)t∈N is a sequence of deterministic functions,
where πt(Ft) speciﬁes a probability distribution over the action set A. Let D(A) denote the
set of probability distributions overA. The action At is a selected by sampling independently
from πt(Ft). With some abuse of notation, we will typically write this distribution asπt, where
πt(a) = P(At = a|Ft) denotes the probability assigned to actiona given the observed history.
We explicitly display the dependence of regret on the policyπ, lettingE[Regret(T,π)] denote the
expected value given by (2) when the actions(A1,..,AT) are chosen according toπ.
Further notation. Set αt(a) = P(A∗= a|Ft) to be the posterior distribution ofA∗. For two
probability measuresP and Qover a common measurable space, ifP is absolutely continuous with
respect toQ, theKullback-Leibler divergencebetween P and Q is
DKL(P||Q) =
ˆ
log
(dP
dQ
)
dP (3)
where dP
dQ is the Radon–Nikodym derivative ofP with respect toQ. For a probability distribution
P over a ﬁnite setX, theShannon entropyof P is deﬁned asH(P) = −∑
x∈XP(x) log (P(x)). The
mutual informationunder the posterior distribution between two random variablesX1 : Ω →X 1,
and X2 : Ω →X 2, denoted by
It(X1; X2) := DKL (P((X1,X2) ∈·|Ft) ||P(X1 ∈·|Ft) P(X2 ∈·|Ft)) , (4)
is the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the joint posterior distribution ofX1 and X2 and the
product of the marginal distributions. Note thatIt(X1; X2) is a random variable because of its
dependence on the conditional probability measureP(·|Ft).
To reduce notation, we deﬁne theinformation gainfrom an actionato begt(a) := It(A∗; Yt,a).
As shown for example in Lemma 5.5.6 of Gray [35], this is equal to the expected reduction in
entropy of the posterior distribution ofA∗due to observingYt(a):
gt(a) = E[H(αt) −H(αt+1)|Ft,At = a] , (5)
5
which plays a crucial role in our results. Let ∆ t(a) := E[Rt,A∗−Rt,a|Ft] denote the expected
instantaneous regret of actiona at timet.
We use overloaded notation forgt(·) and ∆ t(·). For an action sampling distributionπ∈D(A),
gt(π) := ∑
a∈Aπ(a)gt(a) denotes the expected information gain when actions are selected according
to π, and∆ t(π) = ∑
a∈Aπ(a)∆ t(a) is deﬁned analogously. Finally, we sometimes use the shorthand
notation Et[·] = Et[·|Ft] for conditional expectations under the posterior distribution, and similarly
write Pt(·) = P(·|Ft).
4 Algorithm design principles
The primary contribution of this paper is information-directed sampling (IDS), a general princi-
ple for designing action-selection algorithms. We will deﬁne IDS in this section, after discussing
motivations underlying its structure. Further, through a set of examples, we will illustrate how
alternative design principles fail to account for particular kinds of information and therefore can
be dramatically outperformed by IDS.
4.1 Motivation
Our goal is to minimize expected regret over a time horizonT. This is achieved by aBayes-optimal
policy, which, in principle, can be computed via dynamic programming. Unfortunately, computing,
or even storing, this Bayes-optimal policy is generally infeasible. For this reason, there has been
signiﬁcant interest in developing computationally eﬃcient heuristics.
As with much of the literature, we are motivated by contexts where the time horizonT is
“large.” For largeT and moderate timest≪ T, the mapping from belief state to action prescribed
by the Bayes-optimal policy does not vary signiﬁcantly from one time period to the next. As such,
it is reasonable to restrict attention to stationary heuristic policies. IDS falls in this category.
IDS is motivated largely by a desire to overcome shortcomings of currently popular design
principles. In particular, it accounts for kinds of information that alternatives fail to adequately
address:
1. Indirect information. IDS can select an action to obtain useful feedback about other
actions even if there will be no useful feedback about the selected action.
2. Cumulating information. IDS can select an action to obtain feedback that does not
immediately enable higher expected reward but can eventually do so when combined with
feedback from subsequent actions.
3. Irrelevant information.IDS avoids investments in acquiring information that will not help
to determine which actions ought to be selected.
Examples presented in Section 4.3 aim to contrast the manner in which IDS and alternative ap-
proaches treat these kinds of information.
It is worth noting that we refer to IDS as adesign principle rather than analgorithm. The
reason is that IDS does not specify steps to be carried out in terms of basic computational opera-
tions but only an abstract objective to be optimized. As we will discuss later, for many problem
classes of interest, like the Bernoulli bandit, the Gaussian bandit, and the linear bandit, one can
develop tractable algorithms that implement IDS. The situation is similar for upper conﬁdence
bounds, Thompson sampling, expected improvement maximization, and knowledge gradient; these
are abstract design principles that lead to tractable algorithms for speciﬁc problem classes.
6
4.2 Information-directed sampling
IDS balances between obtaining low expected regret in the current period and acquiring new in-
formation about which action is optimal. It does this by minimizing over all action sampling
distributions π ∈D(A) the ratio between the square of expected regret∆ t(π)2 and information
gain gt(π) about the optimal actionA∗. In particular, the policyπIDS =
(
πIDS
1 ,πIDS
2 ,...
)
is deﬁned
by:
πIDS
t ∈arg min
π∈D(A)
{
Ψ t(π) := ∆ t(π)2
gt(π)
}
. (6)
We callΨ t(π) the information ratioof an action sampling distributionπ. It measures the squared
regret incurred per-bit of information acquired about the optimum. IDS myopically minimizes this
notion of cost-per-bit of information in each period.
Note that IDS isstationary randomized policy: randomized in that each action is randomly
sampled from a distribution and stationary in that this action distribution is determined by the
posterior distribution ofθand otherwise independent of the time period. It is natural to wonder
whether randomization plays a fundamental role or if a stationary deterministic policy can oﬀer
similar behavior. The following example sheds light on this matter.
Example 1 (A known standard). Consider a problem with two actionsA= {a1,a2}. Re-
wards froma1 are known to be distributed Bernoulli(1/2). The distribution of rewards froma2 is
Bernoulli(3/4) with prior probabilityp0 and is Bernoulli(1/4) with prior probability1 −p0.
Consider a stationary deterministic policy for this problem. With such a policy, each action
At is a deterministic function ofpt−1, the posterior probability conditioned on observations made
through period t−1. Suppose that for somep0 > 0, the policy selectsA1 = a1. Since this is an
uninformative action,pt = p0 and At = a1 for allt, and thus, expected regret grows linearly with
time. If, on the other hand, A1 = a2 for all p0 > 0 then At = a2 for all t, which again results
in expected regret that grows linearly with time. It follows that, for any deterministic stationary
policy, there exists a prior probabilityp0 such that expected regret grows linearly with time.
In Section 5, we will establish a sub-linear bound on expected regret of IDS. The result implies
that, when applied to the preceding example, the expected regret of IDS does not grow linearly
as does that of any stationary deterministic policy. This suggests that randomization plays a
fundamental role.
It may appear that the need for randomization introduces great complexity since the solution of
the optimization problem (6) takes the form of a distribution over actions. However, an important
property of this problem dramatically simpliﬁes solutions. In particular, as we will establish in
Section 6, there is always a distribution with support of at most two actions that attains the
minimum in (6).
4.3 Alternative design principles
Several alternative design principles have ﬁgured prominently in the literature. However, each of
them fails to adequately address one or more of the categories of information enumerated in Section
4.1. This motivated our development of IDS. In this section, we will illustrate through a set of
examples how IDS accounts for such information while alternatives fail.
4.3.1 Upper conﬁdence bounds and Thompson sampling
Upper conﬁdence bound (UCB) and Thompson sampling (TS) are two of the most popular princi-
ples for balancing between exploration and exploitation. As data is collected, both approaches do
7
not only estimate the rewards generated by diﬀerent actions, but carefully track the uncertainty in
their estimates. They then continue to experiment with all actions that couldplausibly be optimal
given the observed data. This guarantees actions are not prematurely discarded, but, in contrast
to more naive approaches likes theϵ-greedy algorithm, also ensures that samples are not wasted on
clearly suboptimal actions.
With a UCB algorithm, actions are selected through two steps. First, for each actiona ∈A
an upper conﬁdence bound Bt(a) is constructed. Then, the algorithm selects an action At ∈
arg maxa∈ABt(a) with maximal upper conﬁdence bound. The upper conﬁdence boundBt(a) rep-
resents the greatest mean reward value that is statistically plausible. In particular,Bt(a) is typically
constructed to be optimistic(Bt(a) ≥E[Rt,a|θ]) and asymptotically consistent (Bt(a) → E[Rt,a|θ]
as data about the actiona accumulates).
A TS algorithm simply samples each actions according to the posterior probability that it is
optimal. In particular, at each timet, an action is sampled fromπTS
t = αt. This means that for
each a∈A, P(At = a|Ft) = P(A∗= a|Ft) = αt(a). This algorithm is sometimes calledprobability
matching because the action selection distribution ismatched to the posterior distribution of the
optimal action.
For some problem classes, UCB and TS lead to eﬃcient and empirically eﬀective algorithms with
strong theoretical guarantees. Speciﬁc UCB and TS algorithms are known to be asymptotically
eﬃcient for multi-armed bandit problems with independent arms [5, 19, 44, 48, 49] and satisfy
strong regret bounds for some problems with dependent arms [17, 24, 25, 33, 56, 59, 67].
Unfortunately, as the following examples demonstrate, UCB and TS do not pursue indirect
information and because of that can perform very poorly relative to IDS for some natural problem
classes. A common feature of UCB and TS that leads to poor performance in these examples is
that they restrict attention to sampling actions that have some chance of being optimal. This is the
case with TS because each action is selected according to the probability that it is optimal. With
UCB, the upper-conﬁdence-bound of an action known to be suboptimal will always be dominated
by others.
Our ﬁrst example is somewhat contrived but designed to make the point transparent.
Example 2. (a revealing action)LetA= {0,1,...,K}consist ofK+1 actions and suppose that
θis drawn uniformly at random from a ﬁnite setΘ = {1,...,K}of K possible values. Consider a
problem with bandit-feedbackYt,a = Rt,a. Under θ, the reward of actiona is
Rt,a =

}

1 θ= a
0 θ̸= a, a̸= 0
1
2θ a= 0.
Note that action0 is known to never yield the maximal reward, and is therefore never selected
by TS or UCB. Instead, these algorithms will select among actions{1,...,K}, ruling out only a
single action at a time until a reward 1 is earned and the optimal action is identiﬁed. Their expected
regret therefore grows linearly inK. IDS is able to recognize that much more is learned by drawing
action 0 than by selecting one of the other actions. In fact, selecting action0 immediately identiﬁes
the optimal action. IDS selects this action, learns which action is optimal, and selects that action
in all future periods. Its regret is independent ofK.
Our second example may be of greater practical signiﬁcance. It represents the simplest case of
a sparse linear model.
Example 3. (sparse linear model)Consider a linear bandit problem whereA⊂ Rd and the
reward from an actiona ∈A is aTθ∗. The true parameterθ is known to be drawn uniformly at
8
random from the set of 1-sparse vectorsΘ = {θ′∈{0,1}d : ∥θ′∥0 = 1}. For simplicity, assume
d = 2m for some m ∈N. The action set is taken to be the set of vectors in{0,1}d normalized to
be a unit vector in theL1 norm: A=
{
x
∥x∥1
: x∈{0,1}d,x ̸= 0
}
.
For this problem, when an actiona is selected andy = aTθ ∈{0,1/∥a∥0}is observed, each
θ′∈Θ with aTθ′̸= y is ruled out. LetΘ t denote the set of all parameters inΘ that are consistent
with the rewards observed up to timet and letIt = {i ∈{1,...,d}: θ′
i = 1,θ′∈Θ t}denote the
corresponding set of possible positive components.
Note that A∗= θ. That is, if θ were known, choosing the actionθ would yield the highest
possible reward. TS and UCB algorithms only choose actions from the support ofA∗and therefore
will only sample actionsa∈A that, likeA∗, have only a single positive component. Unless that is
also the positive component ofθ, the algorithm will observe a reward of zero and rule out only one
element ofIt. In the worst case, the algorithm requiresd samples to identify the optimal action.
Now, consider an application of IDS to this problem. The algorithm essentially performs binary
search: it selectsa∈A with ai >0 for half of the componentsi∈It and ai = 0 for the other half
as well as for anyi /∈It. After justlog2(d) time steps the true value of the parameter vectorθis
identiﬁed.
To see why this is the case, ﬁrst note that all parameters inΘ t are equally likely and hence
the expected reward of an actiona is 1
|It|
∑
i∈It ai. Since ai ≥0 and ∑
iai = 1 for each a ∈A,
every action whose positive components are inIt yields the highest possible expected reward of
1/|It|. Therefore, binary search minimizes expected regret in periodtfor this problem. At the same
time, binary search is assured to rule out half of the parameter vectors inΘ t at each timet. This
is the largest possible expected reduction, and also leads to the largest possible information gain
about A∗. Since binary search both minimizes expected regret in periodtand uniquely maximizes
expected information gain in periodt, it is the sampling strategy followed by IDS.
In this setting we can explicitly calculate the information ratio of each policy, and the diﬀerence
between them highlights the advantages of information-directed sampling. We have
Ψ 1(πTS
1 ) = (d−1)2/d2
log(d)
d + d−1
d log
(
d
d−1
)∼ d
log(d) Ψ 1(πIDS
1 ) = 1
log(2)
(
1 −1
d
)2
∼ 1
log(2)
where h(d) ∼f(d) if h(d)/f(d) → 1 as d→∞ . When the dimensiond is large,Ψ 1(πIDS
1 ) is much
smaller.
Our ﬁnal example involves an assortment optimization problem.
Example 4. (assortment optimization)Consider the problem of repeatedly recommending an
assortment of products to a customer. The customer has unknown typeθ ∈Θ where |Θ |= n.
Each product is geared toward customers of a particular type, and the assortmenta ∈A = Θ m
of m products oﬀered is characterized by the vector of product typesa = (a1,...,am). We model
customer responses through a random utility model in which customers are more likely to derive
high value from a product geared toward their type. When oﬀered an assortment of productsa, the
customer associates with theith product utilityU(t)
θ,i(a) = β1{ai=θ}+ W(t)
i , where Wt
i follows an
extreme–value distribution andβ ∈R is a known constant. This is a standard multinomial logit
discrete choice model. The probability a customer of typeθchooses producti is given by
exp{β1{ai=θ}}
∑m
j=1 exp{β1{aj=θ}}.
When an assortmenta is oﬀered at timet, the customer makes a choiceIt = arg maxiU(t)
θi (a) and
leaves a reviewU(t)
θIt(a) indicating the utility derived from the product, both of which are observed by
9
the recommendation system. The reward to the recommendation system is the normalized utility of
the customerU(t)
θIt(a)/β.
If the typeθof the customer were known, then the optimal recommendation would beA∗=
(θ,θ,...,θ), which consists only of products targeted at the customer’s type. Therefore, both TS
and UCB would only oﬀer assortments consisting of a single type of product. Because of this, TS
and UCB each require ordern samples to learn the customer’s true type. IDS will instead oﬀer a
diverse assortment of products to the customer, allowing it to learn much more quickly.
To render issues more transparent, suppose thatθis drawn uniformly at random fromΘ and
consider the behavior of each type of algorithm in the limiting case whereβ→∞ . In this regime,
theprobabilityacustomerchoosesaproductoftype θifitisavailabletendsto1, andthenormalized
review β−1U(t)
θIt(a) tends to1{aIt=θ}, an indicator for whether the chosen product is of typeθ. The
initial assortment oﬀered by IDS will consist ofmdiﬀerent and previously untested product types.
Such an assortment maximizes both the algorithm’s expected reward in the next period and the
algorithm’s information gain, since it has the highest probability of containing a product of type
θ. The customer’s response almost perfectly indicates whether one of those items was of typeθ.
The algorithm continues oﬀering assortments containingm unique, untested, product types until
a review nearU(t)
θIt(a) ≈1 is received. With extremely high probability, this takes at most⌈n/m⌉
time periods. By diversifying themproducts in the assortment, the algorithm learns a factor ofm
times faster.
As in the previous example, we can explicitly calculate the information ratio of each policy, and
the diﬀerence between them highlights the advantages of IDS. The information ratio of IDS is more
than m times smaller:
Ψ 1(πTS
1 ) =
(
1 −1
n
)2
1
n log(n) + n−1
n log
(
n
n−1
)∼ n
log(n) Ψ 1(πIDS
1 ) =
(
1 −m
n
)2
m
n log( n
m) + n−m
n log
(
n
n−m
)≤ n
mlog( n
m).
4.3.2 Other information-directed approaches
Another natural information-directed algorithm aims to maximize the information acquired about
the uncertain model parameter θ. In particular, consider an algorithm that selects the action
at time t that maximizes the weighted combination of the expected reward the action generates
and the information it generates about the uncertain model parameterθ: Et[Rt,a] + λIt(Yt,a; θ).
Throughout this section we will refer to this algorithm asθ-IDS. While such an algorithm can
perform well on particular examples, the next example highlights that it may invest in acquiring
information aboutθthat is irrelevant to the decision problem.
Example 5. (unconstrained assortment optimization)Consider again the problem of re-
peatedly recommending assortments of products to a customer with unknown preferences. The
recommendation system can choose any subset of productsa ⊂{1,..,n}to display. When oﬀered
assortment a at time t, the customer chooses the itemJt = arg maxi∈aθi and leaves the review
Rt,a = θJt where θi is the utility associated with producti. The recommendation system observes
both Jt and the reviewRt,a, and has the goal of learning to oﬀer the assortment that yields the best
outcome for the customer and maximizes the reviewRt,a. Suppose thatθis drawn as a uniformly
random permutation of the vector(1,1
2 ,1
3 ,...,1
n). The customer is known to assign utility 1 to
her most preferred item, 1/2 to the next best item, 1/3 to the third best, and so on, but the rank
ordering is unknown.
10
In this example, no learning is required to oﬀer an optimal assortment: since there is no
constraint on the size of the assortment, it’s always best to oﬀer the full collection of products
a= {1,...,n}andallowthecustomertochoosethemostpreferred. Oﬀeringthisassortmentreveals
which item is most preferred by the customer, but it reveals nothing about her preferences about
others. When applied to this problem,θ-IDS begins by oﬀering the full assortmentA1 = {1,...,n},
whichyieldsarewardof1, and, byrevealingthetopitem, yieldsinformationof I1(Y1,A1 ; θ) = log(n).
But, if1/2 < λlog(n−1), which is guaranteed for suﬃciently largen, it continues experimenting
with suboptimal assortments. In the second period, it will oﬀer the assortmentA2 consisting of all
products exceptarg maxiθi. Playing this assortment reveals the customer’s second most preferred
item, and yields information gainI2(Y2,A2 ; θ) = log( n−1). This process continues until the ﬁrst
period k where λlog(n+ 1 −k) <1 −1/k.
In order to learn to oﬀer eﬀective assortments,θ-IDS tries to learn as much as possible about
the customer’s preferences. In doing this, the algorithm inadvertently invests experimentation
eﬀort in information that is irrelevant to choosing an optimal assortment. On the other hand, IDS
recognizes that the optimal assortmentA∗= {1,...,n}does not depend on full knowledge of the
vector θ, and therefore does not invest in identifyingθ.
As shown in Section 9.2, our analysis can be adapted to provide regret bounds in for a version
of IDS that uses information gain with respect toθ, rather than with respect toA∗. These regret
bounds depends on the entropy ofθ, whereas the bound for IDS depends on the entropy ofA∗,
which can be much smaller.
4.3.3 Expected improvement and the knowledge gradient
We now consider two algorithms which measure the quality of the best decision that can be made
based on current information, and encourage gathering observations that are expected to imme-
diately increase this measure. The ﬁrst is the expected improvement algorithm, which is one
of the most widely used techniques in the active ﬁeld of Bayesian optimization (see [13]). Deﬁne
µt,a = E[Rt,a|Ft] to be the expected reward generated byaunder the posterior, andVt = maxa′µt,a′
to be the best objective value attainable given current information. The expected improvement
of action a is deﬁned to beE[max{fθ(a),Vt}|Ft], where fθ(a) = E[Rt,a|θ] is the expected reward
generated by actiona under the unknown true parameterθ. The EGO algorithm aims to identify
high performing actions by sequentially sampling those that yield the highest expected improve-
ment. Similar to UCB algorithms, this encourages the selection of actions that could potentially
oﬀer great performance. Unfortunately, like these UCB algorithms, this measure of improvement
does not place value on indirect information: it won’t select an action that provides useful feedback
about other actions unless the mean-reward of that action might exceedVt. For example, the ex-
pected improvement algorithm cannot treat the problem described in Example 2 in a satisfactory
manner.
The knowledge gradient algorithm [64] uses a modiﬁed improvement measure. At timet, it
computes
vKG
t,a := E[Vt+1|Ft,At = a] −Vt
for each actiona. If Vt measures the quality of the decision that can be made based on current
information, then vKG
t,a captures the immediate improvement in decision quality due to sampling
action a and observing Yt,a. For a problem with time horizonT, the knowledge gradient (KG)
policy selects an action in time periodt by maximizingµt,a + (T −t)vKG
t,a over actionsa∈A.
Unlike expected-improvement, the measurevKG
t,a of the value of sampling an action places value
on indirect information. In particular, even if an action is known to yield low expected reward,
11
sampling that action could lead to a signiﬁcant increase inVt by providing information about
other actions. Unfortunately, there are no general guarantees for KG, and it sometimes struggles
with cumulating information; individual observations that provide information aboutA∗may not
be immediately useful for making decisions in the next period, and therefore may lead to no
improvement inVt.
Example 1 provides one simple illustration of this phenomenon. In that example, action 1 is
known to yield a mean reward of 1/2. Whenp0 ≤1/4, upon sampling action 2 and observing a
reward 1, the posterior expected reward of action 2 becomes
E[R2,a2 |R1,a2 = 1] = p0(3/4)
p0(3/4) + (1−p0)(1/4) ≤1/2.
In particular, a single sample could never be inﬂuential enough to change which action has the
highest posterior expected reward. Therefore,vKG
t,a2 = 0, and the KG decision rule selects action 1
in the ﬁrst period. Since nothing is learned from the resulting observation, it will continue selecting
action 1 in all subsequent periods. Even as the time horizonT tends to inﬁnity, the KG policy
would never select action 2. Its cumulative regret overT time periods is equal to(p0/4)T, which
grows linearly withT.
In this example, although sampling action 2 will not immediately shift the decision-maker’s
prediction of the best action (arg maxaE[θa|F1]), these samples inﬂuences her posterior beliefs and
reduce uncertainty about which action is optimal. As a result, IDS will always assign positive
probability to sampling the second action. More broadly, IDS places value on information that is
pertinent to the decision problem, even if that information won’t directly improve performance on
its own. This is useful when one must combine multiple pieces of information in order to eﬀectively
learn.
To address problems like Example 1, Frazier and Powell [28] propose KG* – a modiﬁed form
of KG that considers the value of sampling a single action many times. This helps to address
some cases – those where a single sample of an action provides no value even though sampling
the action several times could be quite valuable – but this modiﬁcation may not adequately assess
information gain in more general problems. KG* may explore very ineﬃciently, for instance, in the
sparse linear bandit problem considered in Example 3. However, the performance of KG* on this
problem depends critically on how ties are broken among actions maximizingµt,a+ (T−t)vKG
t,a . To
avoid such ambiguity, we instead consider the following modiﬁcation to Example 3.
Example 6. (sparse linear model with an outside option)Consider a modiﬁcation to Ex-
ample 3 in which the agent has access to a outside option that generates known, but suboptimal,
rewards. The action set isA= {O}∪A′, where the outside optionO is know to always yield reward
1/2, and A′=
{
x
∥x∥1
: x∈{0,1}d,x ̸= 0
}
is the action space considered in Example 3. As before,
the reward generated by actiona ∈A′is aTθwhere θis drawn uniformly at random from the set
of 1-sparse vectorsΘ = {θ′∈{0,1}d : ∥θ′∥0 = 1}. As before, assume for simplicity thatd= 2m for
some m∈N.
When the horizonT is long, the inclusion of the outside option should be irrelevant. Indeed,
nothing is learned by sampling the outside option, and it is known apriori to be suboptimal: it
generates a reward of 1/2 whereas the optimal action generates a reward of1 = maxa∈A′aTθ. An
optimal algorithm for Example 6 should sample actions inA′until the optimal action is identiﬁed
and should do so in a manner that minimizes the expected regret incurred.
Note that in the absence of observation noise, KG and KG* are equivalent, and so we will not
distinguish between these two algorithms. We will see that whenT is large, KG always samples
12
actions in A′until the optimal action is identiﬁed. However, the expected number of samples
required, and the expected regret incurred, both scale linearly with the dimensiond. IDS, on the
other hand, identiﬁes the optimal action after onlylog2(d) steps.
To see why, note that unless the agent has exactly identiﬁed the parameterθ, selecting the
outside option will always generate the highest expected reward in the next period. Only selecting
anactionwithasinglepositivecomponentcouldimmediatelyreveal θ, soinresponseKGonlyplaces
value on the information generated by such actions. When the horizon is large, KG prioritizes such
information over the safe reward oﬀered by the outside option. It therefore engages in exhaustive
search, sequentially checking each componenti∈{1,...,d}of θuntil θi = 1 is observed.
To show this more precisely, let us reintroduce some notation used in Example 3. As before,
when an actiona∈A′is selected andy= aTθ∈{0,1/∥a∥0}is observed, eachθ′∈Θ with aTθ′̸= y
is ruled out. Let Θ t denote the set of all parameters inΘ that are consistent with the rewards
observed up to timetand letIt = {i∈{1,...,d}: θ′
i = 1,θ′∈Θ t}denote the corresponding set of
possible positive components.
The best reward value attainable given current information is
Vt = max
{
1/2, max
a∈A′
E[θTa|Ft]
}
= max
{
1/2, 1
|Θ t|
}
.
Therefore, Vt = 1/2 whenever |Θ t|>1. For remaining indicesi∈It, selecting the standard basis
vector ei and observingθTei = 1 establishes thatθ= ei. As a result,vKG
t,ei = (1/2)P(eT
i θ= 1|Ft) =
1
2|Θ t|> 0. For other actions, observing aTθ ∈{0,1/∥a∥0}is not suﬃcient to identify θ, and so
vKG
t,a = 0. When the horizonT is large, KG always select one of the actions withvKG
t,a >0, and so
the algorithm selects only standard basis vectors untilθis revealed
IDS, on the other hand, essentially performs binary search. In the ﬁrst period, it selects some
permutation of the actiona = (2/d,...,2/d,0,...,0). By observing either aTθ= 0 or aTθ= 1, it
rules out half the parameter vectors inΘ 1. Continuing this binary search process, the parameter
is identiﬁed usingO(log2(d)) steps.
To see why this is the case, let us focus on the ﬁrst period. As in Example 3, selecting an action
with d/2 positive components, likea = (2/d,...,2/d,0,...,0), oﬀers strictly maximal information
gain I1(A∗; aTθ) = log(2) and weakly maximal rewardE[aTθ] = 1/d among all actionsa∈A′. As
a result, any action inA′that is not a permutation ofais strictly dominated and is never sampled
by IDS. It turns out that IDS also has zero probability of selecting the outside option in this case.
Indeed, IDS selectsO with probability1 −α∗, where α∗can be attained as the minimizer of the
information ratio
α∗= arg min
α∈[0,1]
((1 −α)/2 + α(1 −1/d))2
αlog2(d) = arg min
α∈[0,1]
1
2√α + √α
(1
2 −1
d
)
= 1.
This process continues inductively. Another step of binary search again rules out half the compo-
nents in|Θ 1|, leading to an information gain oflog(2) bits. The regret incurred is even lower–now
only (1 −2/d) –and hence the algorithm again has zero probability of selecting the outside option.
Iterating this process, the true positive component ofθis identiﬁed afterlog2(d) steps.
5 Regret bounds
This section establishes regret bounds for information-directed sampling for several of the most
widely studied classes of online optimization problems. These regret bounds follow from our recent
information theoretic-analysis of Thompson sampling [61]. In the next subsection, we establish a
13
regret bound for any policy in terms of its information ratio. Because the information-ratio of IDS
is always smaller than that of TS, the bounds on the information ratio of TS provided in Russo and
Van Roy [61] immediately yield regret bounds for IDS for a number of important problem classes.
5.1 General bound
We begin with a general result that bounds the regret ofany policyin terms of its information ratio
and the entropy of the optimal action distribution. Recall that we have deﬁned the information
ratio of an action sampling distribution to beΨ t(π) := ∆ t(π)2/gt(π); it is the squared expected
regret the algorithm incurs per-bit of information it acquires about the optimum. The entropy
of the optimal action distributionH(α1) captures the magnitude of the decision-maker’s initial
uncertainty about which action is optimal. One can then interpret the next result as a bound on
regret that depends on the cost of acquiring new information and the total amount of information
that needs to be acquired.
Proposition 1. For any policyπ= (π1,π2,π3,...) and timeT ∈N,
E[Regret (T,π)] ≤
∑
Ψ T(π)H(α1)T.
where
Ψ T(π) ≡ 1
T
T
t=1
Eπ[Ψ t(πt)]
is the average expected information ratio underπ.
We will use the following immediate corollary of Proposition 1, which relies on a uniform bound
on the information ratio of the formΨ t(πt) ≤ λ rather than a bound on the average expected
information ratio.
Corollary 1.Fix a deterministicλ∈R and a policyπ= (π1,π2,...) such thatΨ t(πt) ≤λ almost
surely for eacht∈{1,..,T}. Then,
E[Regret (T,π)] ≤
∑
λH(α1)T.
5.2 Specialized bounds on the minimal information ratio
We now establish upper bounds on the information ratio of IDS in several important settings,
which yields explicit regret bounds when combined with Corollary 1. These bounds show that, in
any period, the algorithm’s expected regret can only be large if it is expected to acquire a lot of
information about which action is optimal. In this sense, it eﬀectively balances between exploration
and exploitation inevery period. For each problem setting, we will compare our upper bounds on
expected regret with known lower bounds.
The bounds on the information ratio also help to clarify the role it plays in our results: it
roughly captures the extent to which sampling some actions allows the decision maker to make
inferences about other actions. In the worst case, the ratio depends on the number of actions,
reﬂecting the fact that actions could provide no information about others. For problems with full
information, the information ratio is bounded by a numerical constant, reﬂecting that sampling
one action perfectly reveals the rewards that would have been earned by selecting any other action.
The problems of online linear optimization under “bandit feedback” and under “semi-bandit feed-
back” lie between these two extremes, and the ratio provides a natural measure of each problem’s
14
information structure. In each case, our bounds reﬂect that IDS is able to automatically exploit
this structure.
The proofs of these bounds follow from our recent analysis of Thompson sampling, and the
implied regret bounds are the same as those established for Thompson sampling. In particular,
since Ψ t(πIDS
t ) ≤ Ψ t(πTS
t ) where πTS is the Thompson sampling policy, it is enough to bound
Ψ t(πTS
t ). Several bounds on the information-ratio of TS were provided by Russo and Van Roy [61],
and we defer to that paper for the proofs. While the analysis is similar in the cases considered
here, IDS outperforms Thompson sampling in simulation, and, as we highlighted in the previous
section, is sometimes provably much more informationally eﬃcient.
In addition to the bounds stated here, recent work by Bubeck et al. [18] and Bubeck and Eldan
[16] bounds the information ratio when the reward function is convex, and uses this to study the
order of regret in adversarial bandit convex optimization. This points to a broader potential of
using information-ratio analysis to study the information-complexity of general online optimization
problems.
To simplify the exposition, our results are stated under the assumption that rewards are uni-
formly bounded. This eﬀectively controls the worst-case variance of the reward distribution, and
as shown in the appendix of Russo and Van Roy [61], our results can be extended to the case where
reward distributions are sub-Gaussian.
Assumption 1.sup
y∈Y
R(y) −inf
y∈Y
R(y) ≤1.
5.2.1 Worst case bound
The next proposition shows thatΨ t(πIDS
t ) is never larger than|A|/2. That is, there is always an
action sampling distributionπ ∈D(A) such that∆ t(π)2 ≤(|A|/2)gt(π). As we will show in the
coming sections, the ratio between regret and information gain can be much smaller under speciﬁc
information structures.
Proposition 2. For anyt∈N, Ψ t(πIDS
t ) ≤|A|/2 almost surely.
Combining Proposition 2 with Corollary 1 shows thatE

Regret
(
T,πIDS
)
≤
∑
1
2 |A|H(α1)T.
5.2.2 Full information
Our focus in this paper is on problems withpartial feedback. For such problems, what the decision
maker observes depends on the actions selected, which leads to a tension between exploration and
exploitation. Problems with full information arise as an extreme point of our formulation where
the outcomeYt,a is perfectly revealed by observingYt,˜a for some ˜a ̸= a; what is learned does not
depend on the selected action. The next proposition shows that under full information, the minimal
information ratio is bounded by1/2.
Proposition 3. Suppose for eacht∈N there is a random variableZt : Ω →Z such that for each
a∈A, Yt,a = (a,Zt). Then for allt∈N, Ψ t(πIDS
t ) ≤1
2 almost surely.
Combining this result with Corollary 1 showsE

Regret(T,πIDS)

≤
∑
1
2 H(α1)T. Further, a
worst–case bound on the entropy ofα1 shows thatE

Regret(T,πIDS)

≤
∑
1
2 log(|A|)T. Dani et al.
[23] show this bound is order optimal, in the sense that for any time horizonT and number of actions
|A|there exists a prior distribution overθunder whichinfπE[Regret(T,π)] ≥c0
√
log(|A|)T where
c0 is a numerical constant that does not depend on|A|or T. The bound here improves upon this
15
worst case bound sinceH(α1) can be much smaller thanlog(|A|) when the prior distribution is
informative.
5.2.3 Linear optimization under bandit feedback
The stochastic linear bandit problem has been widely studied (e.g. [1, 24, 56]) and is one of the
most important examples of a multi-armed bandit problem with “correlated arms.” In this setting,
each action is associated with a ﬁnite dimensional feature vector, and the mean reward generated
by an action is the inner product between its known feature vector and some unknown parameter
vector. Because of this structure, observations from taking one action allow the decision–maker to
make inferences about other actions. The next proposition bounds the minimal information ratio
for such problems.
Proposition 4. If A⊂ Rd, Θ ⊂Rd, andE[Rt,a|θ] = aTθfor each actiona∈A, thenΨ t(πIDS
t ) ≤
d/2 almost surely for allt∈N.
This result shows thatE

Regret(T,πIDS)

≤
∑
1
2 H(α1)dT ≤
∑
1
2 log(|A|)dT for linear bandit
problems. Dani et al. [23] again show this bound is order optimal in the sense that, for any time
horizon T and dimensiond, when the action set isA= {0,1}d there exists a prior distribution over
θsuch thatinfπE[Regret(T,π)] ≥c0
√
log(|A|)dT where c0 is a constant that is independent ofd
and T. The bound here improves upon this worst case bound sinceH(α1) can be much smaller
than log(|A|) when the prior distribution in informative.
5.2.4 Combinatorial action sets and “semi-bandit” feedback
To motivate the information structure studied here, consider a simple resource allocation problem.
There ared possible projects, but the decision–maker can allocate resources to at mostm ≤d of
them at a time. At timet, projecti∈{1,..,d}yields a random rewardXt,i, and the reward from
selecting a subset of projectsa∈A⊂{ a′⊂{0,1,...,d}: |a′|≤m}is m−1 ∑
i∈AXt,i. In the linear
bandit formulation of this problem, upon choosing a subset of projectsa the agent would only
observe the overall rewardm−1 ∑
i∈aXt,i. It may be natural instead to assume that the outcome
of each selected project(Xt,i : i∈a) is observed. This type of observation structure is sometimes
called “semi-bandit” feedback [8].
A naive application of Proposition 4 to address this problem would showΨ ∗
t ≤d/2. The next
proposition shows that since the entire parameter vector(θt,i : i ∈a) is observed upon selecting
action a, we can provide an improved bound on the information ratio.
Proposition 5. Suppose A⊂{ a⊂{0,1,...,d}: |a|≤m}, and that there are random variables
(Xt,i : t∈N,i ∈{1,...,d}) such that
Yt,a = (Xt,i : i∈a) and Rt,a = 1
m

i∈a
Xt,i.
Assume that the random variables{Xt,i : i ∈{1,...,d}}are independent conditioned onFt and
Xt,i ∈[−1
2 ,1
2 ] almost surely for each(t,i). Then for allt∈N, Ψ t(πIDS
t ) ≤ d
2m2 almost surely.
In this problem, there are as many as
(d
m
)
actions, but because IDS exploits the structure
relating actions to one another, its regret is only polynomial inm and d. In particular, combining
Proposition5withCorollary1shows E

Regret(T,πIDS)

≤ 1
m
∑
d
2 H(α1)T. SinceH(α1) ≤log |A|=
16
O(mlog( d
m)) this also yields a bound of order
∏
d
m log
(
d
m
)
T. As shown by Audibert et al. [8], the
lower bound1 for this problem is of order
∑
d
mT, so our bound is order optimal up to a
∑
log( d
m)
factor.
6 Computational methods
IDS oﬀers an abstract design principle that captures some key qualitative properties of the Bayes-
optimal solution while accommodating tractable computation for many relevant problem classes.
However, additional work is required to design eﬃcient computational methods that implement
IDS for speciﬁc problem classes. In this section, we provide guidance and examples.
We will focus in this section on the problem of generating an actionAt given the posterior
distribution overθat timet. This sidesteps the problem of computing and representing a posterior
distribution, which can present its own challenges. Though IDS could be combined with approx-
imate Bayesian inference methods, we will focus here on the simpler context in which posterior
distributions can be eﬃciently computed and stored, as is the case when working with tractable
ﬁnite uncertainty sets or appropriately chosen conjugate priors. It is worth noting, however, that
two of our algorithms approximate IDS using samples from the posterior distribution, and this
may be feasible through the use of Markov chain Monte Carlo even in cases where the posterior
distribution cannot be computed or even stored.
6.1 Evaluating the information ratio
Given a ﬁnite action setA= {1,...,K}, we can view an action distributionπ as aK-dimensional
vector of probabilities. The information ratio can then be written as
Ψ t(π) =
(
π⊤⃗∆
)2
π⊤⃗ g,
where ⃗∆ and ⃗ gare K-dimensional vectors with components⃗∆ k = ∆ t(k) and ⃗ gk = gt(k) for k∈A.
In this subsection, we discuss the computation of⃗∆ and ⃗ gfor use in evaluation of the information
ratio.
There is no general eﬃcient procedure for computing⃗∆ and ⃗ ggiven a posterior distribution,
becausethatwouldrequirecomputingintegralsoverpossiblyhigh-dimensionalspaces. Suchcompu-
tation can often be carried out eﬃciently by leveraging the functional form of the speciﬁc posterior
distribution and often require numerical integration. In order to illustrate the design of problem-
speciﬁc computational procedures, we will present two simple examples in this subsection.
We begin with a conceptually simple model involving ﬁnite uncertainty sets.
Example 7. (ﬁnite sets)Consider a problem in whichθ takes values in Θ = {1,...,L}, the
action set is A= {1,...,K}, the observation set is Y = {1,...,N}, and the reward function
1In their formulation, the reward from selecting action a is
∑
i∈a Xt,i, which is m times larger than in our
formulation. The lower bound stated in their paper is therefore of order
√
mdT. They don’t provide a complete
proof of their result, but note that it follows from standard lower bounds in the bandit literature. In the proof of
Theorem 5 in that paper, they construct an example in which the decision maker playsm bandit games in parallel,
each withd/m actions. Using that example, and the standard bandit lower bound (see Theorem 3.5 of Bubeck and
Cesa-Bianchi [15]), the agent’s regret from each component must be at least
√ d
m T, and hence her overall expected
regret is lower bounded by a term of orderm
√ d
m T =
√
mdT.
17
R : Y↦→R is arbitrary. Let p1 be the prior probability mass function ofθ and let qθ,a(y) be the
probability, conditioned onθ, of observingy when actiona is selected.
Note that the posterior probability mass functionpt, conditioned on observations made prior to
period t, can be computed recursively via Bayes’ rule:
pt+1(θ) ← pt(θ)qθ,At(Yt,At)∑
θ′∈Θ pt(θ′)qθ′,At(Yt,At).
Given the posterior distributionpt along with the model parameters(L,K,N,R,q ), Algorithm 1
computes ⃗∆ and ⃗ g. Line 1 computes the optimal action for each value ofθ. Line 2 calculates the
probability that each action is optimal. Line 3 computes the marginal distribution ofY1,a and line
4 computes the joint probability mass function of(A∗,Y1,a). Lines 5 and 6 use the aforementioned
probabilities to compute⃗∆ and ⃗ g.
Algorithm 1ﬁniteIR(L,K,N,R,p,q )
1: Θ a ←{θ|a= arg maxa′
∑
yqθ,a′(y)R(y)} ∀ θ
2: p(a∗) ← ∑
θ∈Θ a∗p(θ) ∀a∗
3: pa(y) ← ∑
θp(θ)qθ,a(y) ∀a,y,θ
4: pa(a∗,y) ← 1
p(a∗)
∑
θ∈Θ a∗qθ,a(y) ∀a,y,a ∗
5: R∗← ∑
a
∑
θ∈Θ a
∑
yp(θ)qθ,a(y)R(y)
6: ⃗ ga ← ∑
a∗,ypa(a∗,y) log pa(a∗,y)
p(a∗)pa(y) ∀a
7: ⃗∆ a ← R∗−∑
θp(θ) ∑
yqθ,a(y)R(y) ∀a
8: return ⃗∆ ,⃗ g
Next, we consider the beta-Bernoulli bandit.
Example 8. (beta-Bernoulli bandit)Consider a multi-armed bandit problem with binary re-
wards: A= {1,...,K}, Y= {0,1}, and R(y) = y. Model parameters θ∈RK specify the mean
reward θa of each actiona. Components ofθare independent and each beta-distributed with prior
parametersβ1
1,β2
1 ∈RK
+
Because the beta distribution is a conjugate prior for the Bernoulli distribution, the posterior
distribution of each θa is a beta distribution. The posterior parameters β1
t,a,β2
t,a ∈R+ can be
computed recursively:
(β1
t+1,a,β2
t+1,a) ←
{
(β1
t,a + Yt,a,β2
t,a + (1 −Yt,a)) if At = a
(β1
t,a,β2
t,a) otherwise.
Given the posterior parameters(β1
t,β2
t), Algorithm 2 computes⃗∆ and ⃗ g.
Line 5 of the algorithm computes the posterior probability mass function ofA∗. It is easy to
18
derive the expression used:
Pt(A∗= a) = Pt

 ⋂
a′̸=a
{θa′≤θa}
(
(
=
ˆ 1
0
fa(x)Pt

 ⋂
a′̸=a
{θa′≤x}
⏐⏐⏐⏐θa = x
(
(dx
=
ˆ 1
0
fa(x)


a′̸=a
Fa′(x)
(
(dx
=
ˆ 1
0
fa(x)
Fa(x)

F(x)dx,
where fa, Fa, andF are deﬁned as in lines 1-3 of the algorithm, with arguments(K,β1
t,β2
t). Using
expressions that can be derived in a similar manner, for each pair of actions Lines 6-7 compute
Ma′|a := Et[θa′|θa = maxa′′θa′′], the expected value ofθa′given that actionais optimal. Lines 8-9
computes the expected reward of the optimal actionρ∗= Et[maxaθa] and uses that to compute,
for each action,
⃗∆ a = Et

max
a′
θa −θa

= ρ∗− β1
t,a
(β1
t,a + β2
t,a).
Finally, line 10 computes⃗ g. The expression makes use of the following fact, which is a consequence
of standard properties of mutual information2:
It(A∗; Yt,a) =

a∗∈A
Pt(A∗= a∗)DKL (Pt(Yt,a = ·|A∗= a∗) ||Pt(Yt,a = ·)) . (7)
That is, the mutual information betweenA∗and Yt,a is the expected Kullback-Leibler divergence
between the posterior predictive distributionPt(Yt,a = ·) and the predictive distribution conditioned
on the identity of the optimal actionPt(Yt,a = ·|A∗= a∗). For our beta-Bernoulli model, the
information gain⃗ ga is the expected Kullback-Leibler divergence between a Bernoulli distribution
with mean Ma|A∗ and the posterior distribution at actiona, which is Bernoulli with parameter
β1
t,a/(β1
t,a + β2
t,a).
Algorithm 2, as we have presented it, is somewhat abstract and can not readily be implemented
on a computer. In particular, lines 1-4 require computing and storing functions of a continu-
ous variable and several lines require integration of continuous functions. However, near-exact
approximations can be eﬃciently generated by evaluating integrands at discrete grid of points
{x1,...,xn}⊂ [0,1]. The values offa(x),Fa(x),Ga(x) and F(x) can be computed and stored for
each value in this grid. The compute time can also be reduced via memoization, since values change
only for one action per time period. The compute time of such an implementation scales withK2n
where K is the number of actions andnis the number of points used in the discretization of[0,1].
The bottleneck is Line 7.
2Some details related to the derivation of this fact whenYt,a is a general random variable can be found in the
appendix of Russo and Van Roy [61].
19
Algorithm 2betaBernoulliIR(K,β1,β2)
1: fa(x) ← beta.pdf(x|β1
a,β2
a) ∀a,x
2: Fa(x) ← beta.cdf(x|β1
a,β2
a) ∀a,x
3: F(x) ← 
aFa(x) ∀x
4: Ga(x) ←
´ x
0 yfa(y)dy ∀a,x
5: p∗(a) ←
´ 1
0
fa(x)
Fa(x)

F(x)dx ∀a
6: Ma|a ← 1
p∗(a)
´ 1
0
xfa(x)
Fa(x)

F(x)dx ∀a
7: Ma′|a ← 1
p∗(a)
´ 1
0

fa(x)F(x)
Fa(x)Fa′(x)

Ga′(x)dx ∀a,a′̸= a
8: ρ∗← ∑
ap∗(a)Ma|a
9: ⃗∆ a ← ρ∗− β1
a
β1a+β2a
∀a
10: ⃗ ga ← ∑
a′p∗(a′)
(
Ma|a′log
(
Ma|a′(β1
a + β2
a)/β1
a
)
+ (1 −Ma|a′) log
(
(1 −Ma|a′)(β1
a + β2
a)/β2
a
))
∀a
11: return ⃗∆ ,⃗ g
6.2 Optimizing the information ratio
Let us now discuss how to generate an action given⃗∆ and ⃗ g̸= 0. If ⃗ g= 0, the optimal action is
known with certainty, and therefore the action selection problem is trivial. Otherwise, IDS selects
an action by solving
min
π∈SK
(
π⊤⃗∆
)2
π⊤⃗ g (8)
where SK = {π ∈RK
+ : ∑
kπk = 1 }is the K-dimensional unit simplex, and samples from the
resulting distributionπ.
The following result establishes that (8) is a convex optimization problem and, surprisingly, has
an optimal solution with at most two non-zero components. Therefore, while IDS is a randomized
policy, it suﬃces to randomize over two actions.
Proposition 6. For all ⃗∆ ,⃗ g∈RK
+ such that ⃗ g̸= 0, the function π ↦→
(
π⊤⃗∆
)2
/π⊤⃗ gis convex
on
{
π∈RK : π⊤⃗ g >0
}
. Moreover, this function is minimized over SK by some π∗for which
|{k: π∗
k >0}|≤2.
Algorithm 3 leverages Proposition 6 to eﬃciently choose an action in a manner that minimizes
(6). The algorithm takes as input⃗∆ ∈RK
+ and ⃗ g∈RK
+ , which provide the expected regret and
information gain of each action. The sampling distribution that minimizes (6) is computed by
iterating over all pairs of actions(a,a′) ∈A×A , and for each, computing the probabilityq that
minimizes the information ratio among distributions that samplea with probabilityq and a′with
probability 1 −q. This one-dimensional optimization problem requires little computation since
the objective is convex;q can be computed by solving for the ﬁrst-order necessary condition or
approximated by a bisection method. The compute time of this algorithm scales withK2.
20
Algorithm 3IDSAction(K,⃗∆ ,⃗ g)
1: qa,a′← arg minq′∈[0,1]

q′⃗∆ a + (1 −q′)⃗∆ a′
2
/[q′⃗ ga + (1 −q′)⃗ ga′] ∀a<K,a ′>a
2: (a∗,a∗∗) ← arg mina<K,a′>a

qa,a′⃗∆ a + (1 −qa,a′)⃗∆ a′
2
/

qa,a′⃗ ga + (1 −qa,a′)⃗ ga′

3: Sample b∼Bernoulli(qa∗,a∗∗)
4: return ba∗+ (1 −b)a∗∗
6.3 Approximating the information ratio
ThoughreasonablyeﬃcientalgorithmscanbedevisedtoimplementIDSforvariousproblemclasses,
some applications, such as those arising in high-throughput web services, call for extremely fast
computation. As such, it is worth considering approximations to the information ratio that re-
tain salient features while enabling faster computation. In this section, we discuss some useful
approximation concepts.
The dominant source of complexity in computing⃗∆ and ⃗ gis in the calculation of requisite
integrals, which can require integration over high-dimensional spaces. One approach to addressing
thischallengeistoreplaceintegralswithsample-basedestimates. Algorithm4doesthis. Inaddition
to the number of actionsK and routines for evaluationq and R, the algorithm takes as inputM
representative samples of θ. In the simplest use scenario, these would be independent samples
drawn from the posterior distribution. The steps correspond to those of Algorithm 1, but with the
set of possible models approximated by the set of representative samples. For many problems, even
when exact computation of⃗∆ and⃗ gis intractable due to required integration over high-dimensional
spaces, Algorithm 1 can generate close approximations from a moderate number of samplesM.
Algorithm 4SampleIR(K,q,R,M,θ 1,...,θM)
1: ˆΘ a ←{m|a= arg maxa′
∑
yqθm,a′(y)R(y)}
2: ˆp(a∗) ←|ˆΘ a∗|/M ∀a∗
3: ˆpa(y) ← ∑
mqa,θm(y)/M ∀y
4: ˆpa(a∗,y) ← ∑
m∈Θ a qa,θm(y)/M ∀a∗,y
5: ˆR∗← ∑
a,y ˆpa(a,y)R(y)
6: ⃗ ga ← ∑
a∗,y ˆpa(a∗,y) log ˆpa(a∗,y)
ˆp(a∗)ˆpa(y) ∀a
7: ⃗∆ a ← R∗−M−1 ∑
m
∑
yqθm,a(y)R(y) ∀a
8: return ⃗∆ ,⃗ g
The information ratio is designed to eﬀectively address indirect information, cumulating infor-
mation, and irrelevant information, for a very broad class of learning problems. It can sometimes
be helpful to replace the information ratio with alternative information measures that adequately
address these issues for more specialized classes of problems. As an example, we will introduce
the variance-based information ratio, which is suitable for some problems with bandit feedback,
satisﬁes our regret bounds for such problems, and can facilitate design of more eﬃcient numerical
methods.
To motivate the variance-based information ratio, note that when rewards our bounded, with
21
R(y) ∈[0,1] for ally, our information measure term is lower-bounded according to
gt(a) = It(A∗; Yt,a)
=

a∗∈A
Pt(A∗= a∗)DKL (Pt(Yt,a = ·|A∗= a∗) ||Pt(Yt,a = ·))
≥

a∗∈A
Pt(A∗= a∗)DKL (Pt(Rt,a = ·|A∗= a∗) ||Pt(Rt,a = ·))
(a)
≥ 2

a∗∈A
Pt(A∗= a∗)(Et[Rt,a|A∗= a∗] −Et[Rt,a])2
= 2 Et[(Et[Rt,a|A∗] −Et[Rt,a])2]
= 2Var t(Et[Rt,a|A∗]),
where Vart(X) = Et[(X −Et[X])2] denotes the variance ofX under the posterior distribution.
Inequality (a) is a simple corollary of Pinsker’s inequality, and is given as Fact 9 in Russo and
Van Roy [61]. Let vt(a) := Var t(Et[Rt,a|A∗]), which represents the variance of the conditional
expectation Et[Rt,a|A∗] under the posterior distribution. This measures how much the expected
reward generated by actionavaries depending on the identity of the optimal actionA∗. The above
lower bound on mutual information indicates that actions with high variancevt(a) must yield
substantial information about which action is optimal. It is natural to consider an approximation
to IDS that uses a variance-based information ratio:
min
π∈SK
(
π⊤⃗∆
)2
π⊤⃗ v,
where ⃗ va = vt(a).
While variance-based IDS will not minimize the information ratio, the next proposition estab-
lishes that it satisﬁes the bounds on the information ratio given by Propositions 2 and 4.
Proposition 7. Suppose supyR(y) −infyR(y) ≤1 and
πt ∈arg min
π∈SK
∆ t(π)2
vt(π) .
Then Ψ t(πt) ≤|A|/2. Moreover, ifA⊂ Rd, Θ ⊂Rd, andE[Rt,a|θ] = aTθfor each actiona∈A,
then Ψ t(πt) ≤d/2.
We now consider a couple examples that illustrate computation of⃗ vand beneﬁts of using this
approximation. Our ﬁrst example is the independent Gaussian bandit problem.
Example 9. (independent Gaussian bandit) Consider a multi-armed bandit problem with
A= {1,...,K}, Y= R, and R(y) = y. Model parameters θ ∈RK specify the mean rewardθa
of each actiona. Components of θ are independent and Gaussian-distributed, with prior means
µ1 ∈RK and covariancesσ2
1 ∈RK. When an action At is applied, the observationYt is drawn
independently fromN(θAt,η2).
The posterior distribution of θ is Gaussian, with independent components. Parameters can be
22
computed recursively according to
µt+1,a ←

}

(
µt,a
σ2
t,a
+ Yt,a
η2
)
/
(
1
σ2
t,a
+ 1
η2
)
if At = a
µt,a otherwise.
σt+1,a ←

}

(
1
σ2
t,a
+ 1
η2
)−1
if At = a
σt,a otherwise.
Given arguments(K,µt,σt), Algorithm 5 computes⃗∆ and ⃗ vfor the independent Gaussian bandit
problem. Note that this algorithm is very similar to Algorithm 2, which was designed for the
beta-Bernoulli bandit. One diﬀerence is that Algorithm 5 computes the variance-based informa-
tion measure. In addition, the Gaussian distribution exhibits special structure that simpliﬁes the
computation ofMa′|a := Et[θa′|θa = maxa′′θa′′] .In particular, the computation ofMa′|a uses the
following closed form expression for the expected value of a truncated Gaussian distribution with
mean ˜µ and variance˜σ2:
E[X|X ≤x] = ˜µ−˜σφ
(x−˜µ
˜σ
)
/Φ
(x−˜µ
˜σ
)
= ˜µ−˜σ2f(x)/F(x),
where X ∼N(˜µ,˜σ2) and f and F are the probability density and cumulative distribution functions.
The analogous calculation that would be required to compute the standard information ratio is
more complex.
Algorithm 5independentGaussianVIR(K,µ,σ )
1: fa(x) ← Gaussian.pdf(x|µa,σ2
a) ∀a,x
2: Fa(x) ← Gaussian.cdf(x|µa,σ2
a) ∀a,x
3: F(x) ← 
aFa(x) ∀x
4: p∗(a) ←
´ 1
0
fa(x)
Fa(x)

F(x)dx ∀a
5: Ma|a ← 1
p∗(a)
´ ∞
−∞
xfa(x)
Fa(x)

F(x)dx ∀a
6: Ma′|a ← µa′−
σ2
a′
p∗(a)
´ ∞
−∞
fa(x)fa′(x)
Fa(x)Fa′(x)

F(x)dx ∀a,a′̸= a
7: ρ∗← ∑
ap∗(a)Ma|a
8: ∆ a ← ρ∗−µa ∀a
9: va ← ∑
a′p∗(a′)
(
Ma|a′−µa
)2
∀a
10: return ⃗∆ ,⃗ v
We next consider the linear bandit problem.
Example 10. (linear bandit) Consider a multi-armed bandit problem withA = {1,...,K},
Y= R, andR(y) = y. Model parametersθ∈RK are drawn from a Gaussian prior with meanµ1
and covariance matrixΣ 1. There is a known matrixΦ = [Φ 1,···,Φ K] ∈Rd×K such that, when
an actionAt is applied, the observationYt,At is drawn independently fromN(Φ Atθ,η2), whereΦ At
denotes theAtth column ofΦ .
The posterior distribution ofθis Gaussian and can be computed recursively:
µt+1 = (Σ −1
t + ΦAtΦ ⊤
At/η2)−1(Σ −1
t µt + Yt,AtΦ At/η2)
23
Σ t+1 = (Σ −1
t + ΦAtΦ ⊤
At/η2)−1.
We will develop an algorithm that leverages the fact that, for the linear bandit,vt(a) takes on
a particularly simple form:
vt(a) = Var t(Et[Rt,a|A∗])
= Var t(Et[Φ ⊤
aθ|A∗])
= Var t(Φ ⊤
aEt[θ|A∗])
= Φ ⊤
aEt[(µA∗
t −µt)(µA∗
t −µt)⊤]Φ a
= Φ ⊤
aLtΦ a,
where µa
t = Et[θ|A∗= a] and Lt = Et[(µA∗
t −µt)(µA∗
t −µt)⊤]. Algorithm 6 presents a sample-based
approach to computing ⃗∆ and ⃗ v. In addition to model dimensions K and d and the problem
data matrix Φ , the algorithm takes as inputM representative values ofθ, which in the simplest
use scenario, would be independent samples drawn from the posterior distributionN(µt,Σ t). The
algorithm approximates posterior meansµt and µa
t as well asLt by averaging suitable expressions
over these samples. Due to the quadratic structure ofvt(a), these calculations are substantially
simpler than those that would be carried out by Algorithm 4, specialized to this context.
Algorithm 6linearSampleVIR(K,d,M,θ 1,...,θM)
1: ˆµ← ∑
mθm/M
2: ˆΘ a ←{m: (Φ ⊤θm)a = maxa′(Φ θm)a′} ∀ a
3: ˆp∗(a) ←|ˆΘ a|/M ∀a
4: ˆµa ← ∑
θ∈ˆΘ a
θ/|ˆΘ a| ∀a
5: ˆL← ∑
a ˆp∗(a) (ˆµa −ˆµ) (ˆµa −ˆµ)⊤
6: ρ∗← ∑
a ˆp∗(a)Φ ⊤
a ˆµa
7: ⃗ va ← Φ ⊤
a ˆLΦ ⊤
a ∀a
8: ⃗∆ a ← ρ∗−Φ ⊤
a ˆµ ∀a
9: return ⃗∆ ,⃗ v
It is interesting to note that Algorithms 4 and 6 do not rely on any special structure in the
posterior distribution. Indeed, these algorithms should prove eﬀective regardless of the form taken
by the posterior. This points to a broader opportunity to use IDS or approximations to address
complex models for which posteriors can not be eﬃciently computed or even stored, but for which
it is possible to generate posterior samples via Markov chain Monte Carlo methods. We leave this
as a future research opportunity.
7 Computational results
This section presents computational results from experiments that evaluate the eﬀectiveness of
information-directed sampling in comparison to alternative algorithms. In Section 4.3, we showed
that alternative approaches like UCB algorithms, Thompson sampling, and the knowledge gradient
algorithm can perform very poorly when faced with complicated information structures and for
this reason can be dramatically outperformed by IDS. In this section, we focus instead on simpler
settings where current approaches are extremely eﬀective. We ﬁnd that even for these simple and
widely studied settings, information-directed sampling displays state-of-the-art performance. For
each experiment, the algorithm used to implement IDS is presented in the previous section.
24
IDS, Thompson sampling (TS), and some UCB algorithms, do not take the horizonT as input,
and are instead designed to work well for all suﬃciently long horizons. Other algorithms we simulate
were optimized for the particular horizon of the simulation trial. The KG and KG* algorithms in
particular, treat the simulation horizon as known, and explore less aggressively in later periods. We
have tried to clearly delineate which algorithms are optimized for simulation horizon. We believe
one can also design variants of IDS, TS, and UCB algorithms that reduce exploration as the time
remaining diminishes, but leave this for future work.
7.1 Beta-Bernoulli bandit
Our ﬁrst experiment involves a multi-armed bandit problem with independent arms and binary
rewards. The mean reward of each arm is drawn fromBeta(1,1), which is the uniform distribution,
and the means of separate arms are independent. Figure 1a and Table 1 present the results of 1000
independent trials of an experiment with 10 arms and a time horizon of 1000. We compared the
performance of IDS to that of six other algorithms, and found that it had the lowest average regret
of 18.0.
The UCB1 algorithm of Auer et al. [9] selects the actionawhich maximizes the upper conﬁdence
bound ˆθt(a)+
√
2 log(t)/Nt(a) where ˆθt(a) is the empirical average reward from samples of actiona
and Nt(a) is the number of samples of actionaup to timet. The average regret of this algorithm is
130.7, which is dramatically larger than that of IDS. For this reason UCB1 is omitted from Figure
1a.
The conﬁdence bounds of UCB1 are constructed to facilitate theoretical analysis. For practical
performance Auer et al. [9] proposed using an algorithm called UCB-Tuned. This algorithm selects
the actionawhich maximizes the upper conﬁdence boundˆθt(a) +
∑
min{1/4 , Vt(a)}log(t)/Nt(a),
where Vt(a) is an upper bound on the variance of the reward distribution at actiona. While this
method dramatically outperforms UCB1, it is still outperformed by IDS. The MOSS algorithm of
Audibert and Bubeck [7] is similar to UCB1 and UCB–Tuned, but uses slightly diﬀerent conﬁdence
bounds. It is known to satisfy regret bounds for this problem that are minimax optimal up to a
numerical constant factor.
In previous numerical experiments [21, 43, 44, 66], Thompson sampling and Bayes UCB exhib-
ited state-of-the-art performance for this problem. Each also satisﬁes strong theoretical guarantees,
and is known to be asymptotically optimal in the sense deﬁned by Lai and Robbins [49]. Unsur-
prisingly, they are the closest competitors to IDS. The Bayes UCB algorithm, studied in kaufmann
et al. [43], constructs upper conﬁdence bounds based on the quantiles of the posterior distribu-
tion: at time stept the upper conﬁdence bound at an action is the1 −1
t quantile of the posterior
distribution of that action3.
A somewhat diﬀerent approach is the knowledge gradient (KG) policy of Powell and Ryzhov
[55], which uses a one-step lookahead approximation to the value of information to guide exper-
imentation. For reasons described in Section 4.3.3, KG does not explore suﬃciently to identify
the optimal arm in this problem, and therefore its regret grows linearly with time. Because KG
explores very little, its realized regret is highly variable, as depicted in Table 1. In 200 out of the
2000 trials, the regret of KG was lower than .7, reﬂecting that the best arm was almost always
chosen. In the worst 200 out of the 2000 trials, the regret of KG was larger than 159.
KG is particularly poorly suited to problems with discrete observations and long time horizons.
The KG* heuristic of Ryzhov et al. [63] oﬀers much better performance in some of these problems.
3Their theoretical guarantees require choosing a somewhat higher quantile, but the authors suggest choosing this
quantile, and use it in their own numerical experiments.
25
Time Horizon Agnostic Optimized For
Time Horizon
Algorithm IDS V-IDS TS Bayes
UCB UCB1 UCB-
Tuned MOSS KG KG*
Mean Regret 18.0 18.1 28.1 22.8 130.7 36.3 46.7 51.0 18.4
Standard Error 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.2 1.5 0.6
Quantile .10 3.6 5.2 13.6 8.5 104.2 24.0 36.2 0.7 2.9
Quantile .25 7.4 8.1 18.0 12.5 117.6 29.2 40.0 2.9 5.4
Quantile .50 13.3 13.5 25.3 20.1 131.6 35.2 45.2 11.9 8.7
Quantile .75 22.5 22.3 35.0 30.6 144.8 41.9 51.0 82.3 16.3
Quantile .90 35.6 36.5 46.4 40.5 154.9 49.5 57.9 159.0 46.9
Quantile .95 51.9 48.8 53.9 47.0 160.4 54.9 64.3 204.2 76.6
Table 1: Realized regret over 2000 trials in Bernoulli experiment
At timet, KG* calculates the value of sampling an arm forM ∈{1,..,T−t}periods and choosing
the arm with the highest posterior mean in subsequent periods. It selects an action by maximizing
this quantity over all possible arms and possible exploration lengthsM. Our simulations require
computing T = 1 ,000 decisions per trial, and a direct implementation of KG* requires order
T3 basic operations per decision. To enable eﬃcient simulation, we use a heuristic approach to
computing KG* proposed by Kamiński [42]. The approximate KG* algorithm we implement uses
golden section search to maximize a non-concave function, but is still empirically eﬀective.
Finally, as demonstrated in Figure 1a, variance-based IDS oﬀers performance very similar to
standard IDS for this problem.
It is worth pointing out that, although Gittins’ indices characterize the Bayes optimal policy
for inﬁnite horizon discounted problems, the ﬁnite horizon formulation considered here is compu-
tationally intractable [30]. A similar index policy [52] designed for ﬁnite horizon problems could
be applied as a heuristic in this setting. However, with long time horizons, the associated compu-
tational requirements become onerous.
0 200 400 600 800 1000Time Period
0
10
20
30
40
50
60Cumulative Regret
KGApproximate KG*IDSThompson SamplingBayes UCBUCB-TunedMOSS
(a) Binary rewards
0 200 400 600 800 1000Time Period
0
50
100
150
200Cumulative Regret
KGKG*Bayes UCBThompson SamplingIDSGPUCBTuned GPUCB (b) Gaussian rewards
Figure 1: Average cumulative regret over 1000 trials
26
Time Horizon Agnostic Optimized For
Time Horizon
Algorithm V-IDS TS Bayes
UCB GPUCB Tuned
GPUCB KG KG*
Mean Regret 58.4 69.1 63.8 157.6 53.8 65.5 50.3
Standard Error 1.7 0.8 0.7 0.9 1.4 2.9 1.9
Quantile .10 24.0 39.2 34.7 108.2 24.2 16.7 19.4
Quantile .25 30.3 47.6 43.2 130.0 30.1 20.8 24.0
Quantile .50 39.2 61.8 57.5 156.5 41.0 25.9 29.9
Quantile .75 56.3 80.6 76.5 184.2 58.9 36.4 40.3
Quantile .90 104.6 104.5 97.5 207.2 86.1 155.3 74.7
Quantile .95 158.1 126.5 116.7 222.7 112.2 283.9 155.6
Table 2: Realized regret over 2000 trials in independent Gaussian experiment
Time HorizonT 10 25 50 75 100 250 500 750 1000 2000
Regret of V-IDS 9.8 16.1 21.1 24.5 27.3 36.7 48.2 52.8 58.3 68.4
Regret of KG(T) 9.2 15.3 20.5 22.9 25.4 35.2 45.3 52.3 62.9 80.0
Table 3: Competitive performance without knowing the time horizon. Average cumulative regret
over 2000 trials in the independent Gaussian experiment.
7.2 Independent Gaussian bandit
Our second experiment treats a diﬀerent multi-armed bandit problem with independent arms.
The reward value at each action a follows a Gaussian distribution N(θa,1). The mean θa ∼
N(0,1) is drawn from a Gaussian prior, and the means of diﬀerent reward distributions are drawn
independently. We ran 2000 simulation trials of a problem with 10 arms. The results are displayed
in Figure 1b and Table 2.
For this problem, we compare variance-based IDS against Thompson sampling, Bayes UCB,
and KG. We use the variance-based variant of IDS because it aﬀords us computational advantages.
We also simulated the GPUCB of Srinivas et al. [67]. This algorithm maximizes the upper
conﬁdence bound µt(a) + √βtσt(a) where µt(a) and σt(a) are the posterior mean and standard
deviation ofθa. They provide regret bounds that hold with probability at least1 −δwhen βt =
2 log
(
|A|t2π2/6δ
)
.This value ofβt is far too large for practical performance, at least in this problem
setting. The average regret of GPUCB4 is 157.6, which is roughly almost three times that of V-IDS.
For this reason, we considered a tuned version of GPUCB that setsβt = clog(t). We ran 1000
trials of many diﬀerent values ofc to ﬁnd the valuec= .9 with the lowest average regret for this
problem. This tuned version of GPUCB had average regret of 53.8, which is slight better than IDS.
The work on knowledge gradient (KG) focuses almost entirely on problems with Gaussian
reward distributions and Gaussian priors. We ﬁnd KG performs better in this experiment than it
did in the Bernoulli setting, and its average regret is competitive with that of IDS.
As in the Bernoulli setting, KG’s realized regret is highly variable. The median regret of KG
is the lowest of any algorithm, but in 100 of the 2000 trials its regret exceeded 283 – seemingly
reﬂecting that the algorithm did not explore enough to identify the best action. The KG* heuristic
explores more aggressively, and performs very well in this experiment.
4We setδ= 0 in the deﬁnition ofβt, as this choice leads to a lower value ofβt and stronger performance.
27
KG is particularly eﬀective over short time spans. Unlike information-directed sampling, KG
takes the time horizonT as an input, and explores less aggressively when there are fewer time
periods remaining. Table 3 compares the regret of KG and IDS over diﬀerent time horizons. Even
though IDS does not take the time horizon into account, it is competitive with KG, even over short
horizons. We believe that IDS can be modiﬁed to exploit ﬁxed and known time horizons more
eﬀectively, though we leave the matter for future research.
7.3 Asymptotic optimality
The previous subsections present numerical examples in which IDS outperforms Bayes UCB and
Thompson sampling for some problems with independent arms. This is surprising since each of
these algorithms is known, in a sense we will soon formalize, to be asymptotically optimal for these
problems. This section presents simulation results over a much longer time horizon that suggest
IDS scales in the same asymptotically optimal way.
We consider again a problem with binary rewards and independent actions. The actionai ∈
{a1,...,aK}yields in each time period a reward that is 1 with probabilityθi and 0 otherwise. The
seminal work of Lai and Robbins [49] provides the following asymptotic lower bound on regret of
any policyπ:
lim inf
T→∞
E[Regret(T,π)|θ]
log T ≥

a̸=A∗
θA∗−θa
DKL(θA∗||θa) := c(θ).
Note that we have conditioned on the parameter vectorθ, indicating that this is a frequentist lower
bound. Nevertheless, when applied with an independent uniform prior overθ, both Bayes UCB
and Thompson sampling are known to attain this lower bound [43, 44].
Our next numerical experiment ﬁxes a problem with three actions and withθ= (.3,.2,.1).We
compare algorithms over a 10,000 time periods. Due to the expense of running this experiment,
we were only able to execute 200 independent trials. Each algorithm uses a uniform prior over
θ. Our results, along with the asymptotic lower bound ofc(θ) log(T), are presented in Figure 2.
0 2 4 6 8 10
x 10
4
0
10
20
30
40
50
60Cumulative Regret
Time Period
 
 
IDS
Thompson Sampling
Bayes UCB
Lower Bound
Figure 2: Cumulative regret over 200 trials.
7.4 Linear bandit problems
Our ﬁnal numerical experiment treats a linear
bandit problem. Each action a ∈ R5 is de-
ﬁned by a 5 dimensional feature vector. The
reward of actiona at time t is aTθ+ ϵt where
θ ∼ N(0,10I) is drawn from a multivariate
Gaussian prior distribution, and ϵt ∼ N(0,1)
is independent Gaussian noise. In each period,
only the reward of the selected action is ob-
served. In our experiment, the action set A
contains 30 actions, each with features drawn
uniformly at random from[−1/
√
5,1/
√
5]. The
results displayed in Figure 3 and Table 5 com-
pare regret across 2,000 independent trials.
We simulate variance-based IDS using the
implementation presented in Algorithm 6. We
28
Time Horizon Agnostic Optimized For
Time Horizon
Algorithm V-IDS TS Bayes
UCB GPUCB Tuned
GPUCB KG KG*
Mean Regret 29.2 38.0 32.9 58.7 29.1 33.2 30.0
Standard Error 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.7 1.4
Quantile .10 13.0 22.6 18.9 41.3 14.5 12.7 11.9
Quantile .25 17.6 27.6 23.1 48.9 18.4 17.5 16.1
Quantile .50 23.2 34.3 29.2 57.9 24.0 24.1 20.6
Quantile .75 32.1 43.7 39.0 67.4 32.9 34.5 28.5
Quantile .90 49.5 56.5 48.7 77.1 46.6 60.9 55.6
Quantile .95 67.5 67.5 58.4 82.7 59.9 94.5 96.1
Table 4: Realized regret over 2000 trials in linear experiment. KG* results are over 500 trails.
Time HorizonT 10 25 50 75 100 250 500
Regret of V-IDS 11.8 16.2 19.6 21.6 23.3 31.1 34.7
Regret of KG(T) 11.1 15.1 19.0 22.5 24.1 34.4 43.0
Table 5: Competitive performance without knowing the time horizon Average cumulative regret
over 2000 trials in linear Gaussian experiment.
compare its regret to six competing algorithms. Like IDS, GP-UCB and Thompson sampling satisfy
strong regret bounds for this problem5. Both algorithms are signiﬁcantly outperformed by IDS.
We also include Bayes UCB [43] and a version of GP-UCB that was tuned, as in Subsection
7.2, to minimize its average regret. Each of these displays performance that is competitive with
that of IDS. These algorithms are heuristics, in the sense that the way their conﬁdence bounds
are constructed diﬀer signiﬁcantly from those of linear UCB algorithms that are known to satisfy
theoretical guarantees.
0 50 100 150 200 250Time Period
0
10
20
30
40
50
60Cumulative Regret
Bayes UCBThompson SamplingGPUCBTuned GPUCBIDSKGKG*
Figure 3: Regret in linear–Gaussian model.
As discussed in Subsection 7.2, unlike IDS,
KG takes the time horizon T as an input,
and explores less aggressively when there are
fewertimeperiodsremaining. Table5compares
IDS to KG over several diﬀerent time horizons.
Even though IDS does not exploit knowledge
of the time horizon, it is competitive with KG
over short time horizons.
In this experiment, KG* appears to oﬀer a
small improvement over standard KG, but as
shown in the next subsection, it is much more
computationally burdensome. To save compu-
tational resources, we have only executed 500
independent trails of the KG* algorithm.
5Regret analysis of GP-UCB can be found in [67]. Regret bounds for Thompson sampling can be found in [6, 59, 61]
29
Arms IDS V-IDS TS Bayes UCB UCB1 KG Approx KG*
10 0.011013 0.01059 0.000025 0.000126 0.000008 0.000036 0.074618
30 0.047021 0.047529 0.000023 0.000147 0.000005 0.000017 0.215145
50 0.104328 0.10203 0.000024 0.000176 0.000005 0.000017 0.358505
70 0.18556 0.178689 0.000028 0.000167 0.000005 0.000017 0.494455
Table 6: Bernoulli Experiment: Compute time per-decision in seconds.
Arms V-IDS TS Bayes UCB GPUCB KG KG*
10 0.00298 0.000008 0.00002 0.00001 0.000146 0.001188
30 0.012597 0.000005 0.000009 0.000005 0.000097 0.003157
50 0.023084 0.000006 0.000009 0.000005 0.000094 0.005146
70 0.03913 0.000006 0.000009 0.000005 0.000098 0.006364
Table 7: Independent Gaussian Experiment: Compute time per-decision in seconds.
7.5 Runtime Comparison
We now compare the time required to compute decisions using the algorithms we have applied. In
our experiments, Thompson sampling and UCB algorithms are extremely fast, sometimes requiring
only a few microseconds to reach a decision. As expected, our implementation of IDS requires
signiﬁcantly more compute time. However, IDS often reaches a decision in only a small fraction
of second, which is tolerable in many application areas. In addition, IDS may be accelerated
considerably via parallel processing or an optimized implementation.
The results for KG are mixed. For independent Gaussian models, certain integrals can be
computed via closed form expressions, allowing KG to execute quickly. There is also a specialized
numerical procedure for implementing KG for correlated (or linear) Gaussian models, but com-
putation is an order of magnitude slower than in the independent case. For correlated Gaussian
models, the KG* policy is much slower than both KG and IDS. For beta-Bernoulli problems, KG
can be computed very easily, but yields poor performance. A direct implementation of the KG*
policy was too slow to simulate, and so we have used a heuristic approach presented in [42], which
uses golden section search to maximize a function that is not necessarily unimodal. This method
is labeled “Approx KG*” in Table 6.
Table 6 displays results for the Bernoulli experiment described in Subsection 7.1. It shows the
average time required to compute a decision in a 1000 period problem with10,30,50 and 70 arms.
IDS was implementing using Algorithm 2 to evaluate the information ratio, and Algorithm 3 to
optimize it. The numerical integrals in Algorithm 2 were approximated using quadrature with 1000
equally spaced points. Table 7 presents results of the corresponding experiment in the Gaussian
case. Finally, Table 8 displays results for the linear bandit experiments described in Subsection 7.4,
which make use of Algorithm 6 and Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling withM = 10,000 samples.
The table provides the average time required to compute a decision in a 250 period problem.
8 Conclusion
This paper has proposed information-directed sampling – a new algorithm for online optimization
problems in which a decision maker must learn from partial feedback. We establish a general
regret bound for the algorithm, and specialize this bound to several widely studied problem classes.
We show that it sometimes greatly outperforms other popular approaches, which don’t carefully
30
Arms Dimension V-IDS TS Bayes UCB GPUCB KG KG*
15 3 0.004305 0.000178 0.000139 0.000048 0.002709 0.311935
30 5 0.008635 0.000064 0.000048 0.000038 0.004789 0.589998
50 20 0.026222 0.000077 0.000083 0.000068 0.008356 1.051552
100 30 0.079659 0.000115 0.000148 0.00013 0.017034 2.067123
Table 8: Linear Gaussian Experiment: Compute time per-decision in seconds.
measure the information provided by sampling actions. Finally, for some simple and widely studied
classes of multi-armed bandit problems we demonstrate simulation performance surpassing popular
approaches.
Many important open questions remain, however. IDS solves a single-period optimization prob-
lem as a proxy to an intractable multi-period problem. Solution of this single-period problem can
itself be computationally demanding, especially in cases where the number of actions is enormous or
mutual information is diﬃcult to evaluate. An important direction for future research concerns the
development of computationally elegant procedures to implement IDS in important cases. Even
when the algorithm cannot be directly implemented, however, one may hope to develop simple
algorithms that capture its main beneﬁts. Proposition 1 shows that any algorithm with small in-
formation ratio satisﬁes strong regret bounds. Thompson sampling is a simple algorithm that, we
conjecture, sometimes has nearly minimal information ratio. Perhaps simple schemes with small
information ratio could be developed for other important problem classes, like the sparse linear
bandit problem.
In addition to computational considerations, a number of statistical questions remain open.
One question raised is whether IDS attains the lower bound of Lai and Robbins [49] for some
bandit problems with independent arms. Beyond the empirical evidence presented in Subsection
7.3, there are some theoretical reasons to conjecture this is true. Next, a more precise understanding
of problem’sinformation complexityremains an important open question for the ﬁeld. Our regret
bound depends on the problem’s information complexity through a term we call the information
ratio, but it’s unclear if or when this is the right measure. Finally, it may be possible to derive
lower bounds using the same information theoretic style of argument used in the derivation of our
upper bounds.
9 Extensions
This section presents a number of ways in which the results and ideas discussed throughout this
paper can be extended. We will consider the use of algorithms like information-directed sam-
pling for pure–exploration problems, a form of information-directed sampling that aims to acquire
information aboutθinstead ofA∗, and a version of information directed-sampling that uses a tun-
ing parameter to control how aggressively the algorithm explores. In each case, new theoretical
guarantees can be easily established by leveraging our analysis of information-directed sampling.
9.1 Pure exploration problems
Consider the problem of adaptively gathering observations
(
A1,Y1,A1 ,...,AT−1,YT−1,AT−1
)
so as
to minimize the expected loss of the best decision at timeT,
E

min
a∈A
∆ T(a)

. (9)
31
Recall that we have deﬁned∆ t(a) := E[Rt,A∗−Rt,a|Ft] to be the expected regret of actiona at
time t. This is a “pure exploration problem,” in the sense that one is interested only in the terminal
regret (9) and not in the algorithm’s cumulative regret. However, the next proposition shows that
bounds on the algorithm’s cumulative expected regret imply bounds onE[mina∈A∆ T(a)].
Proposition 8. If actions are selected according to a policyπ, then
E

min
a∈A
∆ T(a)

≤E[Regret (T,π)]
T .
Proof. By the tower property of conditional expectation, E[∆ t+1(a)|Ft] = ∆ t(a). Therefore,
Jensen’s inequality showsE[mina∈A∆ t+1(a)|Ft] ≤mina∈A∆ t(a) ≤∆ t(πt). Taking expectations
and iterating this relation shows that
E

min
a∈A
∆ T(a)

≤E

min
a∈A
∆ t(a)

≤E[∆ t(πt)] ∀t∈{1,...,T}. (10)
The result follows by summing both sides of (10) overt∈{1,...,T}and dividing each byT.
Information-directed sampling is designed to have low cumulative regret, and therefore balances
between acquiring information and taking actions with low expected regret. For pure exploration
problems, it’s natural instead to consider an algorithm that always acquires as much information
about A∗as possible. The next proposition provides a theoretical guarantee for an algorithm of
this form. The proof of this result combines our analysis of information-directed sampling with
Proposition 8.
Proposition 9. If actions are selected so that
At ∈arg max
a∈A
gt(a),
and Ψ ∗
t ≤λ almost surely for eacht∈{1,...,T}, then
E

min
a∈A
∆ T(a)

≤
√
λH(α1)
T .
Proof. To simplify notation, let∆ ∗
t = mina∈A∆ t(a) denote the minimal expected regret at timet,
and g∗
t = maxa∈Agt(a) denote the information gain under the current algorithm.
Since ∆ t(πIDS
t )2 ≤λgt(πIDS
t ), it is immediate that∆ ∗
t ≤
√
λg∗
t. Therefore
E[∆ ∗
T]
(a)
≤
(1
T
)
E
T
t=1
∆ ∗
t ≤
(√
λ
T
(
E
T
t=1
∑
g∗
t
(b)
≤
(√
λ
T
(√TE
T
t=1
g∗
t
(c)
≤
√
λH(α1)
T .
Inequality (a) uses equation (10) in the proof of Proposition 8, (b) uses the Cauchy-Schwartz
inequality, and (c) follows as in the proof of Proposition 1.
9.2 Using information gain aboutθ
Information-directed sampling optimizes a single-period objective that balances earning high im-
mediate reward and acquiring information. Information is quantiﬁed using the mutual information
between the true optimal action A∗and the algorithm’s next observationYt,a. In this subsec-
tion, we will consider an algorithm that instead quantiﬁes the amount learned through selecting
32
an actiona using the mutual informationIt(θ; Yt,a) between the algorithm’s next observation and
the unknown parameterθ. As highlighted in Subsection 4.3.2, such an algorithm could invest in
acquiring information that is irrelevant to the decision problem. However, in some cases, such an
algorithm can be computationally simple while oﬀering reasonable statistically eﬃciency.
We introduce a modiﬁed form of the information ratio
Ψ θ
t(π) := ∆ t(π)2
∑
a∈Aπ(a)It(θ; Yt,a) (11)
which replaces the expected information gain aboutA∗, gt(π) = ∑
a∈Aπ(a)It(A∗; Yt,a), with the
expected information gain aboutθ.
Proposition 10. For any action sampling distribution˜π∈D(A),
Ψ θ
t(˜π) ≤Ψ t(˜π). (12)
Furthermore, ifΘ is ﬁnite, and there is someλ∈R and policyπ= (π1,π2,...) satisfying Ψ θ
t(πt) ≤λ
almost surely, then
E[Regret(T,π)] ≤
∑
λH(θ)T. (13)
Equation (12) relies on the inequalityIt(A∗; Yt,a) ≤It(θ; Yt,a), which itself follows from the
data processing inequality of mutual information becauseA∗is a function ofθ. The proof of the
second part of the proposition is almost identical to the proof of Proposition 1, and is omitted.
We have provided several bounds on the information ratio ofπIDS of the formΨ t(πIDS
t ) ≤λ.
By this proposition, such bounds imply that ifπ= (π1,π2,...) satisﬁes
πt ∈arg min
π∈D(A)
Ψ θ
t(π)
then, Ψ θ
t(πt) ≤Ψ θ
t(πIDS
t ) ≤Ψ t(πIDS
t ) ≤λ, and the regret bound (13) applies.
9.3 A tunable version of information-directed sampling
In this section, we present an alternative form of information-directed sampling that depends on a
tuning parameterλ∈R. Asλvaries, the algorithm strikes a diﬀerent balance between exploration
and exploration. The following proposition provides regret bounds for this algorithm providedλis
suﬃciently large.
Proposition 11. Fix anyλ∈R such thatΨ t(πIDS
t ) ≤λ almost surely for eacht∈{1,...,T}. If
π= (π1,π2,..) is deﬁned so that
πt ∈arg min
π∈D(A)
{
ρ(π) := ∆ t(π)2 −λgt(π)
}
, (14)
then
E[Regret(T,π)] ≤
∑
λH(α)T.
Proof. We have that
ρ(πt)
(a)
≤ρ(πIDS
t )
(b)
≤0,
where (a) follows sinceπIDS
t is feasible for the optimization problem (14), and (b) follows since
0 = ∆ t(πIDS
t )2 −Ψ t(πIDS
t )gt(πIDS
t ) ≥∆ t(πIDS
t )2 −λgt(πIDS
t ).
Since ρt(πt) ≤0, it must be the case thatλ ≥∆ t(πt)2/gt(πt) Def= Ψ t(πt). The result then follows
by applying Proposition 1.
33
Acknowledgements
We thank the anonymous referees for feedback and stimulating exchanges, Junyang Qian for cor-
recting miscalculations in an earlier draft pertaining to Examples 3 and 4, and Eli Gutin and
Yashodan Kanoria for helpful suggestions. This work was generously supported by a research
grant from Boeing, a Marketing Research Award from Adobe, and the Burt and Deedee McMurty
Stanford Graduate Fellowship.
A Proof of Proposition 6
Proposition 6. For all ⃗∆ ,⃗ g∈RK
+ such that ⃗ g̸= 0 , the function π ↦→
(
π⊤⃗∆
)2
/π⊤⃗ gis convex
on
{
π∈RK : π⊤⃗ g >0
}
. Moreover, this function is minimized over SK by some π∗for which
|{k: π∗
k >0}|≤2.
Proof. First, we show the functionΨ : π ↦→
(
πT∆
)2
/πTg is convex on
{
π∈RK|πTg >0
}
. As
shown in Chapter 3 of Boyd and Vandenberghe [12],f : (x,y) ↦→x2/y is convex over{(x,y) ∈
R2 : y >0}. The function h : π ↦→(πT∆ ,πTg) ∈R2 is aﬃne. Since convexity is preserved under
composition with an aﬃne function, the functionΨ = g◦h is convex.
We now prove the second claim. Consider the optimization problems
minimize Ψ( π) subject toπTe= 1,π ≥0 (15)
minimize ρ(π) subject toπTe= 1,π ≥0 (16)
where
ρ(π) :=
(
πT∆
)2
−
(
πTg
)
Ψ ∗,
and Ψ ∗∈R denotes the optimal objective value for the minimization problem (15). The set of
optimal solutions to (15) and (16) correspond. Note that
Ψ( π) = Ψ ∗ =⇒ ρ(π) = 0
but for any feasibleπ, ρ(π) ≥0 since ∆( π)2 ≥Ψ ∗g(π). Therefore, any optimal solutionπ0 to (15)
is an optimal solutions to (16) and satisﬁesρ(π0) = 0. Similarly, ifρ(π) = 0 then simple algebra
shows thatΨ( π) = Ψ ∗and hence thatπ is an optimal solution to (15)
We will now show that there is a minimizer ofρ(·) with at most two nonzero components, which
implies the same is true ofΨ( ·). Fix a minimizerπ∗of ρ(·). Diﬀerentiating ρ(π) with respect toπ
at π= π∗yields
∂
∂πρ(π∗) = 2
(
∆ Tπ∗
)
∆ −Ψ ∗g
= 2 L∗∆ −Ψ ∗g
where L∗ = ∆ Tπ∗is the expected instantaneous regret of the sampling distribution π∗. Let
d∗= mini ∂
∂πi
ρ(π∗) denote the smallest partial derivative ofρat π∗. It must be the case that anyi
with π∗
i >0 satisﬁes d∗= ∂
∂πi
ρ(π∗), as otherwise transferring probability from actionai could lead
to strictly lower cost. This shows that
π∗
i >0 =⇒ gi = −d∗
Ψ ∗ + 2L∗
Ψ ∗∆ i. (17)
34
Let i1,..,im be the indices such thatπ∗
ik > 0 ordered so thatgi1 ≥gi2 ≥···≥gim.Then we can
choose aβ∈[0,1] so that
m
k=1
π∗
ikgik = βgi1 + (1 −β)gim.
By equation (17), this implies as well that∑m
k=1 π∗
ik∆ ik = β∆ i1 + (1 −β)∆ im, and hence that
the sampling distribution that playsai1 with probability β and aim otherwise has the same in-
stantaneous expected regret and the same expected information gain asπ∗. That is, starting with
a general sampling distributionπ∗that maximizes ρ(π), we showed there is a sampling distribu-
tion with support over at most two actions attains the same objective value and hence that also
maximizes ρ(π).
B Proof of Proposition 1
The following fact expresses the mutual information betweenA∗and Yt,a as the as the expected
reduction in the entropy ofA∗due to observingYt,a.
Fact 1.(Lemma 5.5.6 of Gray [35])
It(A∗; Yt,a) = E[H(αt) −H(αt+1)|At = a,Ft]
Proposition 1.For any policyπ= (π1,π2,π3,...) and timeT ∈N,
E[Regret (T,π)] ≤
∑
Ψ T(π)H(α1)T.
where
Ψ T(π) ≡ 1
T
T
t=1
Eπ[Ψ t(πt)]
is the average expected information ratio underπ.
Proof. Since the policy π is ﬁxed throughout, we will simplify notation and writeΨ t ≡Ψ t(πt),
∆ t ≡∆ t(πt) and gt = gt(πt) throughout this proof. First observe that entropy bounds expected
cumulative information gain:
E
T
t=1
gt = E
T
t=1
E[H(αt) −H(αt+1)|Ft] = E
T
t=1
(H(αt) −H(αt+1)) = H(α1) −H(αT+1) ≤H(α1),
where the ﬁrst equality relies on Fact 1 and the tower property of conditional expectation and the
ﬁnal inequality follows from the non-negativity of entropy. Then,
E[Regret (T,π)] = E
T
t=1
∆ t = E
T
t=1
√
Ψ t
∑
gt
(
πIDS
t
)
≤
√E
T
t=1
Ψ t
√E
T
t=1
gt
≤
∑
H(α1)
√E
T
t=1
Ψ t
=
√
(
1
TE
T
t=1
Ψ t
(
H(α1)T,
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from Holder’s inequality.
35
C Proof of Proposition 7
Proposition 7.Suppose supyR(y) −infyR(y) ≤1 and
πt ∈arg min
π∈SK
∆ t(π)2
vt(π) ,
Then the following hold:
1. Ψ t(πt) ≤|A|/2.
2. Ψ t(πt) ≤d/2 when A⊂ Rd, Θ ⊂Rd, andE[Rt,a|θ] = aTθfor each actiona∈A.
The proof of this proposition essentially reduces to techniques in Russo and Van Roy [61], but
some new analysis is required to show the results in that paper apply to variance-based IDS. A full
proof is provided below.
We will make use of the following fact, which is a matrix-analogue of the Cauchy-Schwartz
inequality. For any rankr matrix M ∈Rn×n with singular valuesσ1,...,σr, let
∥M∥∗:=
r
i=1
σi, ∥M∥F :=
∑∑n
k=1
∑n
j=1 M2
i,j =
∑∑r
i=1 σ2
i, Trace(M) :=
n
i=1
Mii,
denote respectively the Nuclear norm, Frobenius norm and trace ofM.
Fact 2.For any matrixM ∈Rk×k,
Trace (M) ≤
∑
Rank(M)∥M∥F.
We now prove Proposition 7
Proof.
Preliminaries: As noted in Section 6.3,gt(a) ≥2vt(a) for alltand a. Therefore for anyπ∈D(A)
Ψ t(π) = ∆ t(π)2
gt(π) ≤∆ t(π)2
2vt(π) .
Therefore, if
πt = arg min
π∈D(A)
∆ t(π)2
vt(π)
is the action-sampling distribution chosen by variance based IDS, then
Ψ t(πt) ≤∆ t(πt)2
2vt(πt) ≤∆ t(πTS
t )2
2vt(πTS
t ) ,
where πTS
t is the action-sampling distribution of Thompson sampling at timet.
As a result, to showΨ t(πt) ≤λ/2, it’s enough to show∆ t(πTS
t )2 ≤λvt(πTS
t ). We show that
this holds always forλ = |A|, and then show it holds forλ = d when A⊂ Rd, Θ ⊂ Rd, and
E[Rt,a|θ] = aTθfor alla∈A.
36
Recall that by deﬁnition,πTS
t (a) = Pt(A∗= a) for eacha∈A. Therefore
∆ t(πTS
t ) = Et[Rt,A∗] −

a∈A
πTS
t (a)Et[Rt,a]
=

a∗∈A
Pt(A∗= a∗)E[Rt,a∗|A∗= a∗] −

a∈A
Pt(A∗= a)Et[Rt,a]
=

a∈A
Pt(A∗= a) (Et[Rt,a|A∗= a] −Et[Rt,a]) (18)
and
vt(πTS
t ) =

a∈A
πTS
t (a)Vart(E[Rt,a|A∗])
=

a∈A
πTS
t (a)

a∗∈A
Pt(A∗= a∗) (Et[Rt,a|A∗= a∗] −Et[Rt,a])2
=

a,a∗∈A
Pt(A∗= a)Pt(A∗= a∗) (Et[Rt,a|A∗= a∗] −Et[Rt,a])2 . (19)
Proof part 1:By the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, we conclude
∆ t(πTS
t )2 =
(
a∈A
Pt(A∗= a) (Et[Rt,a|A∗= a] −Et[Rt,a])
(2
≤ |A|

a∈A
Pt(A∗= a)2 (Et[Rt,a|A∗= a] −Et[Rt,a])2
≤ |A|

a,a′∈A
Pt(A∗= a)Pt(A∗= a′)
(
Et[Rt,a|A∗= a′] −Et[Rt,a]
)2
= |A|vt(πTS
t ).
As argued above, this impliesΨ t(πt) ≤|A|/2.
Proof of part 2: This argument can be extended to provide a tighter bound under a linear-
ity assumption. Now assumeA⊂ Rd, Θ ⊂Rd, andE[Rt,a|θ] = aTθ. WriteA= {a1,...,aK}and
deﬁne M ∈RK×K by
Mi,j =
∑
Pt(A∗= ai)Pt(A∗= aj) (Et[Rt,ai|A∗= aj] −Et[Rt,ai])
=
∑
αt(ai)αt(aj) (Et[Rt,ai|A∗= aj] −Et[Rt,ai])
for alli,j ∈{1,..,K}. Then, by (18) and (19),
∆ t(πTS
t ) = Trace(M),
and
vt(πTS
t ) = ∥M∥2
F.
This shows, by Fact 2 that
∆ t(πTS
t )2 ≤Rank(M)vt(πTS
t )
We now showRank(M) ≤d. Deﬁne
µ = E[θ|Ft]
µj = E[θ|Ft,A∗= aj] .
37
Then, by the linearity of the expectation operator,Et[Rt,ai|A∗= aj] −Et[Rt,ai] = ( µj −µ)Tai.
Therefore, Mi,j =
∑
αt(ai)αt(aj)((µj −µ)Tai) and
M =
)
]]]]]])
√
αt(a1)
(
µ1 −µ
)T
...
...
√
αt(aK))
(
µk −µ
)T
(
[
√
αt(a1)a1 ··· ···
√
αt(aK)aK

.
Since M is the product of aK by d matrix and ad by K matrix, it has rank at mostd.
References
[1] Y. Abbasi-Yadkori, D. Pál, and C. Szepesvári. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
bandits. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 24, 2011.
[2] Y. Abbasi-Yadkori, D. Pál, and C. Szepesvári. Online-to-conﬁdence-set conversions and ap-
plication to sparse stochastic bandits. InConference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics
(AISTATS), 2012.
[3] R. Agrawal, D. Teneketzis, and V. Anantharam. Asymptotically eﬃcient adaptive allocation
schemes for controlled iid processes: Finite parameter space.IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, 34(3):258–267, 1989.
[4] R. Agrawal, D. Teneketzis, and V. Anantharam. Asymptotically eﬃcient adaptive alloca-
tion schemes for controlled Markov chains: Finite parameter space.IEEE Transactions on
Automatic Control, 34(12):1249–1259, 1989.
[5] S. Agrawal and N. Goyal. Further optimal regret bounds for Thompson sampling. InProceed-
ings of the Sixteenth International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, pages
99–107, 2013.
[6] S. Agrawal and N. Goyal. Thompson sampling for contextual bandits with linear payoﬀs.
In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-13), pages
127–135, 2013.
[7] J.-Y. Audibert and S. Bubeck. Minimax policies for adversarial and stochastic bandits. In
Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pages 217–226, 2009.
[8] J.-Y. Audibert, S. Bubeck, and G. Lugosi. Regret in online combinatorial optimization.Math-
ematics of Operations Research, 2013.
[9] P. Auer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and P. Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit
problem. Machine learning, 47(2):235–256, 2002.
[10] A. Bai, F. Wu, and X. Chen. Bayesian mixture modelling and inference based Thompson
sampling in Monte-Carlo tree search. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems
26. Curran Associates, Inc., 2013.
[11] G. Bartók, D. P. Foster, D. Pál, A. Rakhlin, and C. Szepesvári. Partial monitoring-
classiﬁcation, regret bounds, and algorithms. Mathematics of Operations Research, 39(4):
967–997, 2014.
[12] S.P. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe.Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
38
[13] E. Brochu, V.M. Cora, and N. de Freitas. A tutorial on Bayesian optimization of expensive
cost functions, with application to active user modeling and hierarchical reinforcement learn-
ing. Technical Report TR-2009-23, Department of Computer Science, University of British
Columbia, November 2009.
[14] J. Broder and P. Rusmevichientong. Dynamic pricing under a general parametric choice model.
Operations Research, 60(4):965–980, 2012.
[15] S. Bubeck and N. Cesa-Bianchi. Regret analysis of stochastic and nonstochastic multi-armed
bandit problems. Foundations and trends in machine learning, 5(1):1–122, 2012.
[16] S. Bubeck and R. Eldan. Multi-scale exploration of convex functions and bandit convex opti-
mization. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pages
583–589, 2016.
[17] S. Bubeck, R. Munos, G. Stoltz, and C. Szepesvári. X-armed bandits.Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 12:1655–1695, June 2011.
[18] S. Bubeck, O. Dekel, T. Koren, and Y. Peres. Bandit convex optimization:
√
T regret in one
dimension. In Proceedings of the 28st Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2015.
[19] O. Cappé, A. Garivier, O.-A. Maillard, R. Munos, and G. Stoltz. Kullback-Leibler upper
conﬁdence bounds for optimal sequential allocation. Annals of Statistics, 41(3):1516–1541,
2013.
[20] K. Chaloner, I. Verdinelli, et al. Bayesian experimental design: A review.Statistical Science,
10(3):273–304, 1995.
[21] O. Chapelle and L. Li. An empirical evaluation of Thompson sampling. InNeural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS), 2011.
[22] E. Contal, V. Perchet, and N. Vayatis:. Gaussian process optimization with mutual informa-
tion. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-14),
2014.
[23] V.Dani, S.M.Kakade, andT.P.Hayes. Thepriceofbanditinformationforonlineoptimization.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 345–352, 2007.
[24] V. Dani, T.P. Hayes, and S.M. Kakade. Stochastic linear optimization under bandit feedback.
In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pages 355–366,
2008.
[25] S. Filippi, O. Cappé, A. Garivier, and C. Szepesvári. Parametric bandits: The generalized
linear case. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 23:1–9, 2010.
[26] A. Francetich and D. M. Kreps. Choosing a good toolkit, I: Formulation, heuristics, and
asymptotic properties. preprint, 2016.
[27] A. Francetich and D. M. Kreps. Choosing a good toolkit, II: Simulations and conclusions.
preprint, 2016.
[28] P.I. Frazier and W.B. Powell. Paradoxes in learning and the marginal value of information.
Decision Analysis, 7(4):378–403, 2010.
[29] P.I. Frazier, W.B. Powell, and S. Dayanik. A knowledge-gradient policy for sequential infor-
mation collection. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 47(5):2410–2439, 2008.
[30] J. Gittins, K. Glazebrook, and R. Weber.Multi-Armed Bandit Allocation Indices. John Wiley
& Sons, Ltd, 2011. ISBN 9780470980033.
[31] D.GolovinandA.Krause. Adaptivesubmodularity: Theoryandapplicationsinactivelearning
and stochastic optimization.Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 42(1):427–486, 2011.
39
[32] D. Golovin, A. Krause, and D. Ray. Near-optimal bayesian active learning with noisy obser-
vations. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 766–774, 2010.
[33] A. Gopalan, S. Mannor, and Y. Mansour. Thompson sampling for complex online problems. In
Proceedings of The 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 100–108, 2014.
[34] T.L. Graves and T.L. Lai. Asymptotically eﬃcient adaptive choice of control laws in controlled
Markov chains.SIAM journal on control and optimization, 35(3):715–743, 1997.
[35] R.M. Gray.Entropy and information theory. Springer, 2011.
[36] P. Hennig and C.J. Schuler. Entropy search for information-eﬃcient global optimization.The
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 98888(1):1809–1837, 2012.
[37] D. Hernández-Lobato, J. M. Hernández-Lobato, A. Shah, and R. P. Adams. Predictive entropy
search for multi-objective Bayesian optimization.arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05467, 2015.
[38] J. M. Hernández-Lobato, M. W. Hoﬀman, and Z. Ghahramani. Predictive entropy search
for eﬃcient global optimization of black-box functions. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pages 918–926, 2014.
[39] J. M. Hernández-Lobato, M. A. Gelbart, M. W. Hoﬀman, R. P. Adams, and Z. Ghahramani.
Predictive entropy search for Bayesian optimization with unknown constraints. InProceedings
of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, Lille, France, 2015.
[40] T. Jaksch, R. Ortner, and P. Auer. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement learning.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:1563–1600, 2010.
[41] B. Jedynak, P.I. Frazier, R. Sznitman, et al. Twenty questions with noise: Bayes optimal
policies for entropy loss.Journal of Applied Probability, 49(1):114–136, 2012.
[42] B.Kamiński. Reﬁnedknowledge-gradientpolicyforlearningprobabilities. Operations Research
Letters, 43(2):143–147, 2015.
[43] E. kaufmann, O. Cappé, and A. Garivier. On Bayesian upper conﬁdence bounds for bandit
problems. In Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2012.
[44] E. Kaufmann, N. Korda, and R. Munos. Thompson sampling: an asymptotically optimal ﬁnite
time analysis. InInternational Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, 2012.
[45] R. Kleinberg, A. Slivkins, and E. Upfal. Multi-armed bandits in metric spaces. InProceedings
of the 40th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 2008.
[46] L. Kocsis and Cs. Szepesvári. Bandit based Monte-Carlo planning. InECML, 2006.
[47] H.J. Kushner. A new method of locating the maximum point of an arbitrary multipeak curve
in the presence of noise.Journal of Basic Engineering, 86(1):97–106, 1964.
[48] T.L. Lai. Adaptive treatment allocation and the multi-armed bandit problem.The Annals of
Statistics, pages 1091–1114, 1987.
[49] T.L. Lai and H. Robbins. Asymptotically eﬃcient adaptive allocation rules. Advances in
applied mathematics, 6(1):4–22, 1985.
[50] D. V. Lindley. On a measure of the information provided by an experiment. Annals of
Mathematical Statistics, 78(4):986–1005, 1956.
[51] J. Mockus, V. Tiesis, and A. Zilinskas. The application of Bayesian methods for seeking the
extremum. Towards Global Optimization, 2(117-129):2, 1978.
[52] J. Nińo-Mora. Computing a classic index for ﬁnite-horizon bandits.INFORMS Journal on
Computing, 23(2):254–267, 2011.
[53] I. Osband, D. Russo, and B. Van Roy. (More) eﬃcient reinforcement learning via posterior
40
sampling. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2013.
[54] A. Piccolboni and C. Schindelhauer. Discrete prediction games with arbitrary feedback and
loss. InInternational Conference on Computational Learning Theory, pages 208–223. Springer,
2001.
[55] W.B. Powell and I.O. Ryzhov.Optimal learning, volume 841. John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[56] P. Rusmevichientong and J.N. Tsitsiklis. Linearly parameterized bandits. Mathematics of
Operations Research, 35(2):395–411, 2010.
[57] P. Rusmevichientong, Z.-J. M. Shen, and D.B. Shmoys. Dynamic assortment optimization
with a multinomial logit choice model and capacity constraint.Operations research, 58(6):
1666–1680, 2010.
[58] D. Russo and B. Van Roy. Eluder dimension and the sample complexity of optimistic explo-
ration. In C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, and K. Q. Weinberger,
editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26, pages 2256–2264. Curran As-
sociates, Inc., 2013.
[59] D. Russo and B. Van Roy. Learning to optimize via posterior sampling. Mathematics of
Operations Research, 39(4):1221–1243, 2014.
[60] D. Russo and B. Van Roy. Learning to optimize via information-directed sampling. In
Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors,Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27, pages 1583–1591. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2014.
[61] D. Russo and B. Van Roy. An information-theoretic analysis of Thompson sampling.Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 17(68):1–30, 2016.
[62] D. Russo, D. Tse, and B. Van Roy. Time-sensitive bandit learning and satisﬁcing Thompson
sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.09028.
[63] I. Ryzhov, P. Frazier, and W. Powell. On the robustness of a one-period look-ahead policy in
multi-armed bandit problems.Procedia Computer Science, 1(1):1635–1644, 2010.
[64] I.O. Ryzhov, W.B. Powell, and P.I. Frazier. The knowledge gradient algorithm for a general
class of online learning problems.Operations Research, 60(1):180–195, 2012.
[65] D. Sauré and A. Zeevi. Optimal dynamic assortment planning with demand learning.Manu-
facturing & Service Operations Management, 15(3):387–404, 2013.
[66] S.L. Scott. A modern Bayesian look at the multi-armed bandit.Applied Stochastic Models in
Business and Industry, 26(6):639–658, 2010.
[67] N. Srinivas, A. Krause, S.M. Kakade, and M. Seeger. Information-theoretic regret bounds
for Gaussian process optimization in the bandit setting.IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, 58(5):3250 –3265, may 2012.
[68] M. Valko, A. Carpentier, and R. Munos. Stochastic simultaneous optimistic optimization.
In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-13), pages
19–27, 2013.
[69] M. Valko, N. Korda, R. Munos, I. Flaounas, and N. Cristianini. Finite-time analysis of ker-
nelised contextual bandits. InConference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2013.
[70] J. Villemonteix, E. Vazquez, and E. Walter. An informational approach to the global opti-
mization of expensive-to-evaluate functions. Journal of Global Optimization, 44(4):509–534,
2009.
41
[71] R. Waeber, P.I. Frazier, and S.G. Henderson. Bisection search with noisy responses.SIAM
Journal on Control and Optimization, 51(3):2261–2279, 2013.
42