http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.91.062705
Polar features in the ﬂagellar propulsion of E. coli bacteria
S. Bianchi 1, F. Saglimbeni 1, A. Lepore 1, and R. Di Leonardo 1,2∗
1Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit` a di Roma “Sapienza”, I-00185, Roma, Italy and
2CNR-NANOTEC, Soft and Living Matter Laboratory, I-00185 Roma, Italy
(Dated: September 11, 2018)
E. coli bacteria swim following a run and tumble pattern. In the run state all ﬂagella join in a
single helical bundle that propels the cell body along approximately straight paths. When one or
more ﬂagellar motors reverse direction the bundle unwinds and the cell randomizes its orientation.
This basic picture represents an idealization of a much more complex dynamical problem. Although
it has been shown that bundle formation can occur at either pole of the cell, it is still unclear whether
this two run states correspond to asymmetric propulsion features. Using holographic microscopy
we record the 3D motions of individual bacteria swimming in optical traps. We ﬁnd that most cells
possess two run states characterised by diﬀerent propulsion forces, total torque and bundle confor-
mations. We analyse the statistical properties of bundle reversal and compare the hydrodynamic
features of forward and backward running states. Our method is naturally multi-particle and opens
up the way towards controlled hydrodynamic studies of interacting swimming cells.
INTRODUCTION
Escherichia coli is a peritrichously ﬂagellated rod-
shaped bacterium with no apparent signs of polarity. It
swims at about 20 µm/s following a characteristic run
and tumble pattern [1]. When all ﬂagella rotate in the
same direction they join together near a cell pole forming
a compact helical bundle that propels the cell body along
approximately straight runs. The bundle, however, has
a ﬁnite lifetime of about 1 s after which it disentangles
due to one or more ﬂagellar motor changing direction [2].
In this transient state, called tumble, the uncoordinated
motions of ﬂagella cause a rapid and random reorienta-
tion of the cell body axis. After about 0.1 s all ﬂagella
resume to the same rotation direction and a new bundle
forms. In a perfectly symmetric cell, bundle formation
should occur with equal probability at either cell pole
and result in equal propulsion forces. Conversely, polar
ﬂagellated bacteria like P. putida have been observed to
swim in opposite directions with very diﬀerent speeds [3].
However, even in the case of an apparently symmetric cell
like E. coli , division by binary ﬁssion allows to distin-
guish between a new and an old pole. An age asymmetry
between the two poles will naturally give rise to a corre-
sponding asymmetry in all pole properties that depend
on the cell age. For example, the chemoreceptor Tsr has
been shown to be more abundant at the old pole [4]. An
accurate analysis of ﬂagella distribution over the cell sur-
face also shows an increased density of ﬂagella over the
old pole cell half [5]. In addition, since the average num-
ber of ﬂagella is typically only about 6 [5], large devia-
tions from a symmetric ﬂagellar distribution are expected
to occur just by random chance. These observations lead
naturally to the question whether the motility properties
of E. coli display any corresponding asymmetries, what
is their nature and entity and if there’s any particular ad-
vantage that an asymmetric swimming could oﬀer. One
of the ﬁrst polar features that was recognised in the run
and tumble motion of E. coli was that a large number of
cells show a marked tendency of forming the bundle at
one speciﬁc pole after a tumble [6]. Later work showed
that the old pole is usually the preferred pole for bundle
formation and attributed this to a larger average num-
ber of ﬂagella over the old pole cell half [5]. Long term
observation of tumbling E. coli in a double optical trap
conﬁrmed the presence of a preferred pole for bundle for-
mation in the majority of cells [7]. The latter work also
reported the presence of two distinct body rotation fre-
quencies corresponding to a bundle forming at one pole
or the other. However, the presence of two corresponding
distinct propelling forces has never been reported so far.
A direct measurement of the propelling force is feasi-
ble in principle using calibrated optical traps [8]. Using a
two trap setup, combined with back focal plane detection
of cross-polarised transmitted beams, is a common and
highly accurate way for measuring forces between two
trapped spherical objects [9]. Although a two trap con-
ﬁguration has been successfully applied for trapping and
alignment of rod-shaped bacteria [7], force measurements
are not straightforward when trapping a single elongated
body. An alternative approach consists in trapping a cell
near the coverslip with a single beam while simultane-
ously applying an external ﬂow to align the cell on the
focal plane and gauge propelling forces with viscous drag
[10]. The presence of the ﬂow however could strongly bias
bundle formation towards one pole. Moreover, due to the
proximity of a solid wall, hydrodynamic wall eﬀects can
strongly aﬀect force measurements and swimming eﬃ-
ciency.
Here we demonstrate that a combination of single
beam optical trapping and 3D holographic microscopy
provides an ideal tool to investigate in the bulk ﬂuid
arXiv:1506.09064v1  [cond-mat.soft]  30 Jun 2015
2
the propulsion features of the two possible run states
together with a careful examination of the statistics of
transitions between them. We ﬁnd that the majority of
cells displays two distinct run states depending on which
side the bundle forms. The average diﬀerence between
the two corresponding propelling forces is 35% with the
largest deviations exceeding 100%.
METHODS
FIG. 1. (a) Optical setup: three RGB LED sources are used
for 3-axes DHM volumetric reconstructions of individually
trapped cells. The trapping IR laser (shown in gray) is phase
modulated by a SLM and sent to the entrance pupil of a
100X, NA 1.45 oil immersion objective by a beam splitter
(BS). A second 532 nm laser is coupled to the objective and
used to stop bacterial motility by irreversible photodamage.
(b) A typical RGB fringe pattern produced by a trapped cell
located 7 µm above the focal plane. (c) Corresponding 3D
reconstruction of the cell body.
E. coli cells (MG1655) were streaked on a Petri dish
containing 1.5% of agar and tryptone broth (1% tryp-
tone and 0.5% NaCl). A single-colony was inoculated
into tryptone broth and grown overnight at 32 ◦C. The
saturated culture was then diluted 1:100 (50 µl in 5 ml)
into fresh medium and grown for 4 hours at 32◦C with 200
rpm rotation. Bacterial cells were then harvested from
culture media by centrifugation at 2200 rpm for 10 min-
utes at room temperature. The pellet was resuspended
by gently mixing in trapping buﬀer composed of 100 mM
Tris-HCl, 70 mM NaCl, 2% (wt/vol) glucose and an oxy-
gen scavenging system [7]. The cells were washed three
times to replace growth medium with trapping buﬀer.
Trapping buﬀer sustain bacteria motility and reduce the
oxidative damage to the cell induced by trapping. Indi-
vidual cells were trapped using an infrared ( λ=1064 nm)
holographic trapping system [11] based on a LCOS Spa-
tial Light Modulator (Hamamatsu X10468) Figure 1(a).
Using an oxygen scavenging system trapped bacteria can
display a high motility for hours. 3D volumetric recon-
structions of trapped bacteria are obtained using a 3-
axes/3-colours modiﬁcation of in-line Digital Holographic
Microscopy (DHM) [12]. In conventional in-line DHM
the sample volume is reconstructed by numerically back-
propagating the complex ﬁeld encoded in the interference
pattern between scattered and incident light [13]. In our
setup we replaced the single on-axis illumination beam
with three LED collimated light beams of diﬀerent wave-
lengths (Prizmatix UHP-Mic-LED-630, UHP-Mic-LED-
520, UHP-Mic-LED-450) chosen to match the spectral
response of the three colour channels of a RGB colour
camera (Basler avA1000-100gm). The sample scatters
the light of the three beams producing three indepen-
dent fringe patterns. The ﬁeld intensities corresponding
to the three colour channels are reconstructed in 3D and
then are overlapped to obtain a volumetric image. Fig-
ure 1(b-c) shows a RGB hologram with the corresponding
3D reconstruction of a trapped E. coli . As in standard
DHM, good numerical reconstructions are obtained when
the scattering object is located a few microns above the
focal plane [12, 13]. To meet this requirement, we use
the SLM to move the trapped cells 7 µm above the focal
plane.
RESULTS
We trapped individually 53 cells and observed their 3D
motion at 100 frames per second. Total observation time
for each swimming cell was 5 minutes during which no
motility reduction was observed. Cells were trapped 40
µm above the coverslip so that hydrodynamic coupling
to the glass surface was negligible.
Rod shaped objects like E. coli spontaneously align
along the beam axis maximising the overlap between the
prolate cell body and the elongated focal distribution of
light. In addition to trapping gradient forces, that oppose
cell displacements away from the trap center, gradient
torques arise restoring the cell axis onto the beam axis.
During the run state, a ﬂagellar bundle is formed on
one pole pushing the cell body away from the trap equi-
librium axial position z = 0. Due to a slight misalign-
ment between the bundle and body axes, the cell body
precesses around z. The time evolution of cell position
and orientation were extracted from the ﬁrst and second
spatial moment of volumetric images. Figure 2(b) shows
typical time traces obtained for the axial components of
cell body position z, angular velocity Ω b and polar an-
gle θ of the body axis. Synchronous transitions between
two states are clearly visible in the z and Ωb traces cor-
responding to the two possible run modes in an optical
trap: i) bundle pointing to the negative z direction and
cell swimming upwards with positive z components for
3
z
⌦
✓
a)
b)
c)
FIG. 2. (a) A trapped cell can form a bundle on either of its
two poles. The rotating bundle at one pole pushes the cell
body towards the opposite pole. The two swimming states
also give rise to opposite cell body rotations around z. (b)
Time traces of the axial cell body displacement from the trap
equilibrium position z, rotational frequency Ωb, and cell body
polar angle θ. (c) 2D histogram obtained from the z, Ωb traces
shown in (b).
displacement and angular velocity, ii) bundle pointing to
the positive z direction and cell swimming downwards
with negative z components for displacement and angu-
lar velocity. A closer look to a zoomed 10 s region also
reveals the presence of tumble events that do not lead
to a bundle reversal (dashed lines in Fig. 2(b)). These
events can be discriminated from bundle reversals (solid
red lines in Fig. 2(b)) since both z and Ωb, after a ∼0.3
s transient where large ﬂuctuations around zero are visi-
ble, both return to their initial value rather than chang-
ing sign. These transient tumbling states however are
not visible in the z and Ωb histogram (Figure 2(c)) for
two reasons: i) the systems spends a negligible amount
of time in a tumble compared to to the time spent in the
two run states, ii) the values of z and Ω b are not well
deﬁned during a tumble. The time trace of the cell polar
angle θ reveals the presence of reorienting torques acting
on the cell body during tumble and reversal events (Fig.
2(c)). However, the restoring torque applied by the op-
tical trap always prevents the cells from reorienting and
constraints the polar angle below 5 degrees. 39 bacteria
out of 53 displayed bundle reversals within our obser-
vation time window. We counted a total of about 5400
tumble events, of which 34% led to a bundle reversal.
This value is in between the previously reported ﬁgures
of 56% [6] and 16% [7]. For the particular cell shown in
Fig 2 we counted 99 tumble events of which 34 lead to
a bundle reversal. The cell spends about the same time
in the two run states with an average run duration of 3
s. Fig. 3 shows the cumulative run length distributions
for the two states of 4 cells. Run length distributions
display a high variability among diﬀerent cells (diﬀerent
colours) but also between the two running states of an
individual cell (solid and dashed lines). The distribution
of running times is exponential for run lengths shorter
than 5 s but shows a systematic excess of long runs, as
also found in [7, 14]. In particular, our data seem to show
that the fat tail at long run lengths is more pronounced
in one of the two running states. Trap calibration is per-
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
time (s)
10−2
10−1
100
cumulative run time distribution
FIG. 3. Cumulative run length distributions. Diﬀerent
colours represent diﬀerent cells. Solid and dashed lines dis-
tinguish between the two possible run states corresponding
to having the ﬂagellar bundle at each of the two cell poles.
Black line is the logarithmic average of all the reported curves
whose corresponding exponential ﬁt is shown in gray.
formed independently for each cell after a short exposure
to a focused 532 nm beam that causes photodamage and
stops motility [15–17]. Using our 3D imaging technique
we can track the Brownian ﬂuctuations of the cells posi-
tion and orientation and reconstruct the optical potential
assuming Boltzmann statistics (see Appendix). Once the
trap is calibrated we can directly convertzdisplacements
into propelling forces. In particular we want to address
the open question: is there any change in the propelling
force associated with rebundling of ﬂagella on the oppo-
site cell pole? Before we go further with data analysis it
is useful to consider a simple hydrodynamic scheme for
the swimming problem. Following [18] we model a swim-
ming cell as the combination of two rigid units: the cell
body and the ﬂagellar bundle. The two units are rigidly
connected but they are free to rotate around a common
4
axis. We can formulate the corresponding hydrodynamic
equations in terms of a resistance problem connecting
force and torque components along the swimming direc-
tion to the corresponding velocity and angular frequency
components:
Fb = AbU (1)
Tb = DbΩb (2)
Ff = AfU + BfΩf (3)
Tf = BfU + DfΩf (4)
where the superscripts b and f refer respectively to cell
body and ﬂagellar bundle. The symbol A represents the
translational drag coeﬃcient connecting the linear speed
U to the force F that is needed to move a body in a
purely translatory motion. Similarly Dconnects angular
speed to torque in pure rotations. For bodies that, like
the helical bundle, do not posses three mutually orthog-
onal planes of symmetry, a third coupling coeﬃcient B is
required connecting the angular speed to the force that
is required to prevent them from translating.
For a trapped cell the swimming speed U vanishes
while the total external force is provided by the optical
trap:
Fb + Ff = Ftrap = BfΩf (5)
In other words the trapping force balances the thrust
Fthrust = −BfΩf from the bundle and prevents the cell
from swimming. We measure an average thrust of 0.14
pN which is lower than the previously reported values
0.57 pN and 0.4 pN respectively in [10] and [19]. This is
consistent with the lower average swimming speed that
we measured on our samples ( ∼10 µm/s) compared to
an almost double value (∼20 µm/s) reported in [10, 19].
We believe this discrepancy could be due to diﬀerences
in strain, buﬀer composition and sampling of bacterial
tracks.
In order to quantify the degree of variability of a
generic positive quantity Q between the two run states,
denoted by the subscript + and −, we use the normalised
diﬀerence ∆[Q] = 2 ⟨|Q+ −Q−|/(Q+ + Q−)⟩where an-
gle brackets denote averages over diﬀerent cells. Fig.
4(b) reports a histogram of the normalised force diﬀer-
ences between the two states. For the thrust we obtain
∆[Fthrust] = 0 .35 that is much larger than the average
force ﬂuctuations between diﬀerent runs in the same di-
rection (10%). In other words, run and tumble dynam-
ics in E. coli is characterised by two diﬀerent and well
deﬁned run states corresponding to ﬂagella bundling at
one of the two cell poles and resulting in propelling force
diﬀerences that are on average 35% with tails extend-
ing over 100%. This is in contrast with what found in
another peritrichously ﬂagellated bacterium B. subtilis
where very similar swimming speeds have been measured
[20]. The more symmetric swimming behavior of B. sub-
tilis could be related to a larger number of ﬂagella (∼30).
As shown in Fig. 4(c), large diﬀerences are also observed
between the torque values in the two run states. Since
Db does not change upon bundle reversal we have, using
(2), ∆[Tb] = ∆[Ωb] = 0.45 that is again much larger than
torque ﬂuctuations between diﬀerent runs pointing in the
same direction (15%). It is interesting to note that, using
the torque free condition Tb = −Tf and applying ∆[·] to
both sides of (4) we get ∆[Tb] = ∆[Tf] = ∆[Df]+∆[Ω f].
If we assume, as reported in [7], that the bundle rota-
tion frequency does not change much upon reversal then
∆[Ωf] ∼0 and therefore we obtain ∆[Tb] ∼∆[Df]. This
seems to suggest that the observed torque diﬀerences be-
tween the two run states have to be attributed mostly to
changes in bundle conformations leading to changes in
the rotational drag Df. Large variations in Df could re-
sult from having one or more ﬂagella rotating out of the
bundle. From (2) and (4) we obtain that the propelling
force should be directly proportional to the measured
body rotation frequency Fthrust = Db Bf/Df Ωb. Since
Db does not change upon bundle reversal, any change in
the ratio Fthrust/Ωb has to be attributed to diﬀerent bun-
dle conformations in the two states leading to a diﬀerent
Bf/Df ratio. Fig. 4(a) reports a plot of Fthrust versus Ωb
for all cells that undergo at least one reversal. Solid lines
connect points that refer to the same cell. If the bun-
dle conformation remained the same upon reversal, for
each cell, the two points should lay on a line with slope
DbBf/Df passing through the origin. This is clearly
not the case for the vast majority of cells. From data
shown in Fig 4 we get ∆[Bf/Df] = ∆[Fthrust/Ωb] = 0.47
indicating again a substantial variation between bundle
conformations in the two states. The solid black line in
Fig. 4(a) represents the best ﬁt through the points whose
slope (0 .0026 ±0.0001 pN s/rad) provides the average
value:
⟨Fthrust
Ωb
⟩
=
⟨
Db⟩ ⟨Bf
Df
⟩
(6)
where we have assumed that body size and ﬂagel-
lar bundle conformation are statistically independent.
The average value of ⟨Db⟩ can be estimated approx-
imating the cell body with a prolate ellipsoid having
the cell length ℓ as the major axis and the cell thick-
ness a as the average minor axis, Db = µπa2ℓ (where
µ is the water viscosity). The average cell length and
its corresponding standard error are obtained by 3D re-
constructions ( ⟨ℓ⟩ = 3 .12 ±0.06 µm) while the width
is independently measured on ﬂuorescently labeled cells
(⟨a⟩= 0 .40 ±0.02 µm). As a result we obtain an av-
erage value for ⟨Db⟩= 0 .0063 ±0.0006 pN µm s/rad.
Using (6) we ﬁnd ⟨Bf/Df⟩= 0 .41 ±0.04 µm−1. Our
value is signiﬁcantly lower then that found in [10], where
the authors obtained for the same ratio 1.13 µm−1. Re-
5
cent studies [21] have shown that resistive force theories
usually result in an overestimation of the thrust Bf of
helical propellers while Lighthill’s slender body theory
[22] provides a much more accurate result. In particular,
using average bundle parameters from [2] (length 7.3µm,
pitch 2.3 µm, diameter 0.36 µm) and assuming a bundle
radius of 0.02 µm we get from slender body theory a ratio
Bf/Df = 0.38 that is in very good agreement with our
measured value.
 100  50 0 50 100
⌦b (rad/s)
 0.2
 0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Fthrust (pN) 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
2|F+   F |/(F+ + F )
0
2
4
6
8
10counts
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
2|T+   T |/(T+ + T )
0
2
4
6
8counts
a) b)
c)
FIG. 4. (a) Thrust Fthrust versus body angular frequency
Ωb for all the bacteria undergoing bundle reversals. Diﬀerent
bacteria are shown in diﬀerent colours. Solid lines join the two
run states for the same cell. Error bars represent ± the stan-
dard deviation of Fthrust and Ωb between diﬀerent runs. (b)
Histogram of the normalized force diﬀerence between the two
run states. (c) Histogram of the normalized torque diﬀerence
between the two run states.
CONCLUSIONS
We combined optical traps and 3D holographic mi-
croscopy to investigate asymmetric features that arise in
E. coli swimming as a consequence of ﬂagellar bundling
at either pole of the cell. We found that two well deﬁned
running states exist. These are characterised by large
diﬀerences in propelling force, total applied torque and
ﬂagellar conformation. We also provide a direct mea-
surement of the ratio Bf/Df which conﬁrms predictions
from slender body theory. Our technique can be easily
extended to multiple cell systems allowing to study hy-
drodynamic couplings between individual swimming cells
in well deﬁned and reproducible conﬁgurations.
The research leading to these results has received
funding from the European Research Council under
the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013) / ERC grant agreement n◦307940. We
also acknowledge funding from MIUR-FIRB project No.
RBFR08WDBE.
APPENDIX: TRAP CALIBRATION
FIG. 5. Probability distribution (a-c) of x, z, cos(θ) of a
trapped non-motile E. coli cell. The corresponding potentials,
measured in units of kBT, are plotted as blue dots (d-f). The
potentials are ﬁtted with polynomials of respectively second,
third, and ﬁrst order that are plotted as blue lines.
Trap calibration is performed individually on each cell
after a short exposure to 532 nm laser light that stops
motility. The Brownian ﬂuctuations of position x,y,z
and polar angle θ are recorded for 5 minutes in an op-
tical trap of reduced intensity such that ﬂuctuations in
z have a comparable amplitude to those observed with
motile cells. For small ﬂuctuations the optical energy is
separable in the sum of independent contributions:
U(x,y,z,θ ) ≃Ux(x) + Uy(y) + Uz(z) + Uθ(θ)) (7)
Thermal ﬂuctuation will be then distributed according to
Boltzmann statistics leading to a factorized probability
density:
P(x,y,z,θ ) ∝e−βUx(x)e−βUy(y)e−βUz(z)e−βUθ(θ) (8)
with β = 1/kBT. This approximation is conﬁrmed by the
absence of correlation between the coordinates (x,y,z,θ ).
The individual probability densities and the correspond-
ing potentials are reported in Fig. 5. We are interested
here in converting zdisplacements into optical forces. To
this aim we ﬁt Uz(z) with a 3 rd order polynomial:
U(z) = 1
2kz2 + 1
3k′z3 (9)
We ﬁnd that k′/k is always of the order of 10 −2 µm−1.
In our experiments the laser power is adjusted to the
minimum value that is required for stable trapping of
6
swimming cells. In this situation the cell body moves
away from the trap’s equilibrium position by 1.2 µm at
most. Therefore, the third order term only aﬀects force
measurements at the level of a few percent that is below
other sources of error.
∗ roberto.dileonardo@phys.uniroma1.it
[1] H. C. Berg, E. coli in motion, Springer-Verlag, New York
(2004).
[2] L. Turner, W. S. Ryu, and H. C. Berg, Real-Time Imag-
ing of Fluorescent Flagellar Filaments, J. Bacteriol., 182,
2793 (2000).
[3] M. Theves, J. Taktikos, V. Zaburdaev, H. Stark, and C.
Beta, A Bacterial Swimmer with Two Alternating Speeds
of Propagation, Biophys. Journal, 105, 1915 (2013).
[4] L. Ping, B. Weiner, N. Kleckner, TsrGFP accumulates
linearly with time at cell poles, and can be used to dif-
ferentiate old versus new poles, in Escherichia coli Mol.
Microbiol. 69, 1427 (2008).
[5] L. Ping, The Asymmetric Flagellar Distribution and
Motility of Escherichia coli , J. Mol. Biol., 397, 906
(2010).
[6] H. C. Berg, and L. Turner, Cells of Escherichia coli swim
either end forward , PNAS, 92, 477 (1995).
[7] T. L. Min, P. J. Mears, L. M. Chubiz, C. V. Rao, I.
Golding, and Y. R. Chemla, High-resolution, long-term
characterization of bacterial motility using optical tweez-
ers, Nat. Methods, 6, 831 (2009).
[8] A. Ashkin, Optical Trapping and Manipulation of Neu-
tral Particles Using Lasers , World Scientiﬁc, Singapore
(2006).
[9] J. W. Shaevitz, E.A. Abbondanzieri, R. Landick, and
S. M. Block, Backtracking by single RNA polymerase
molecules observed at near-base-pair resolution , Nature,
426, 684 (2003).
[10] S. Chattopadhyay, R. Moldovan, C. Yeung, and X. L.
Wu, Swimming eﬃciency of bacterium Escherichia coli ,
PNAS, 203, 13712 (2006).
[11] M. J. Padgett, and R. Di Leonardo, Holographic optical
tweezers and their relevance to lab on chip devices , Lab
Chip, 11, 1196, (2011).
[12] F. Saglimbeni, S. Bianchi, A. Lepore, and R. Di
Leonardo, Three-axis digital holographic microscopy for
high speed volumetric imaging, Optics Express, 22, 13710
(2014).
[13] W. Xu, M. H. Jericho, I. A. Meinertzhagen, and H.
J. Kreuzer, Digital in-line holography of microspheres ,
Appl. Opt., 41, 5367 (2002).
[14] E. Korobkova, T. Emonet, J. Vilar, T. Shimizu, P. Cluzel,
From molecular noise to behavioural variability in a single
bacterium, Nature 428, 574 (2004).
[15] A. Ashkin, and J. M. Dziedzic, Optical trapping and
manipulation of single living cells using infra-red laser
beams, Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem. 93, 254 (1989).
[16] K. C. Neuman, E. H. Chadd, G. F. Liou, K. Bergman,
and S. M. Block, Characterization of photodamage to
Escherichia coli in optical traps , Biophys. J., 77, 2856
(1999).
[17] M. B. Rasmussen, L. B. Oddershede, and H. Siegum-
feldt, Optical tweezers cause physiological damage to Es-
cherichia coli and Listeria bacteria , Appl. Environ. Mi-
crobiol., 74, 2441 (2008).
[18] E. M. Purcell, The eﬃciency of propulsion by a rotating
ﬂagellum, PNAS, 9, 11307 (1997).
[19] K. Drescher, J. Dunkel, L. H. Cisneros, S. Ganguly,
and R. E. Goldstein, Fluid dynamics and noise in bacte-
rial cellcell and cellsurface scattering , PNAS, 108, 10940
(2011).
[20] L. Cisneros, C. Dombrowski, R. E. Goldstein, and J. O.
Kessler, Reversal of bacterial locomotion at an obstacle ,
Phys. Rev. E, 73, 030901 (2006).
[21] B. Rodenborn, C. H. Chen, H. L. Swinney, B. Liu, and
H. P. Zhang, Propulsion of microorganisms by a helical
ﬂagellum, PNAS, 210, E338 (2012).
[22] J. Lighthill, Mathematical Bioﬂuiddynamics , SIAM,
Philadelphia (1989).